A COLLECTION 

0 F 

TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNITDS, 

RELATING TO 

INDIA. AND NEKffiBOtrBIM COUNTRIES. 


COMPILED BY 

C. U. AITCHISON, B. C. S., 

UNDER-SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OP INDIA IN THE .FOREIGN DEPARTMENT. 


YOL. III. 

CONTAINING 

THE TREATIES, &c., RELATING- TO THE PEISHWA^NMRGRH^ 

AND BUNDELCUND. 


CALCUTTA: 

I'UINTT.D liV 1\ M. CT.ANH'NBi:UGlI, BENGAL PRINTING COMPANY LIMITED, 
N... HASTINGS' STREET. 


1863. 



PREFACE. 


lBSence from Calcutta has prevented the Compiler from 
paring Maps for this Yolume similar to the Maps which 
nnpanied Yolumes I. and II. 

•esides the Chiefs mentioned at page 229, the Chiefs of 
following States in Bundelcund abolished all transit 
ies within their States while this Yolume was passing 
ufgh the Press:— 

Sumptur. 

Sureela. 

Jussoo. 

Behree. 

Chobey Jaghires of Tiraon, Bysonda, and 
Nyagaon. 

Nagode. 

Sohawul. 

Che Compiler desires to record his obligations to Dr. 
■atton, Political Assistant in Bundelcund, who supplied 
a with several Sunnuds not on record in the Poreign 
ace. 


SlMEA, 

th September 1863. 



CONTENTS 


PART I. 

TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, and SUNNUDS relating to the 

PEISHWA. 


Page. 

The PEISHWA ... ... ... 1 to 90 

I. Treaty with the Mahrattas, dated 12th July 1739 ... ... io 

II. Articles of Agreement for an expedition against Toolajee Angria by 
the Governor of Bombay, in behalf of the Hon’ble East India 
Company, and Ramajee Punt, in behalf of his master, Nana 
(Balajee Rajee Rao) Pundit Purdhan, General of the Mahrattas, 
dated March 1755 ... ... ... ... ... ig 

III. Treaty with the Mahrattas, dated 12th October 1756 ... ... 17 

IV. Articles of Agreement made with Seuram Punt Tatiah, in 

behalf of Madarao Balajee, son of Balajee Bajee Rao Pundit 
Punt Purdan, dated 14th September 1761... ... ... 22 

V. Treaty with Ragoba, dated 6th March 1775 ... ... ... 24 

VI. Treaty between the Hon’ble East India Company and the Mahratta 

State, dated 1st March 1776 ... ... ... ... 33 

VII. Treaty with Ragoba, dated 24th November 1778 ... ... 39 

VIII. Convention of Wurgaon, 1779 ... ... ... ... 46 

Agreement of John Carnac, Esq., Counsellor, and Col. Egerton 
and English Committee of Bombay, with Madajee Scindeah ... 48 

IX. Treaty of Peace with the Mahrattas, dated June 1782 ... ... 49 

X. Additional Treaty between the Hon’ble Company and the Peishwa 

of the Mahratta State, dated 26th April 1783 ... ... 55 

XI. Translation of a Treaty settled betwixt the Hon’ble East India 

Company and the Peishwa Mahdoo Rao Narain and Mahratta 
State, dated 28th October 1783 ... ... ... 57 

XU. Treaty of Alliance between the Company, the Peishwa, and the 

Nizam, against Tippoo Sultan, dated 1st June 1790 ... ... 58 

XIH. Treaty with the Peishwa, commonly called the Treaty of Bassein, 

dated 31st December 1802 ... ... ... ... $3 

Supplemental to the Treaty of Bassein, dated 16th December 1803 ... 73 



VI 


CONTENTS, 


ra*/*'. 

Tiie PEISHWA.—( Con titi ued .) 

XIV. Partition Treaty of Poona with Ilis Highness the Feislnva, dated 

14th May 1804 ... ... ••• ... *•* 

XV. Treaty between the IIonTdc East India Company and Ilis Highness 

Bajee Rao Rughonath Rao Pundit Purdhan, dated 13th June 1817 70 

XVI. Propositions to Bajce Rao, dated 1st June ISIS ... ... 90 


PART IL 

TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, and SUNNUDS relating to 

NAGPORE. 

NAGPORE... ... ... ... ... 91 to 135 

XVII. Treaty with the Rajah of Berar, 1781 ... 05 

XVIII. Treaty of Peace between the East India Company and their allies 
on the one part, and Senali Sahcb Soubah Raghojeo Bhoosla on the 
other, dated 17th December 1803 ... ... ... 07 

XIX. Translation of an Engagement for .the restitution of the Provinces 

of Sumbulpore and Patna by the British Government to Rajah 
Raghojec Bhoosla Senali Sahcb Soobah Bahadoor, dated 24th 
August 1806 ... ... ... ... ... 99 

XX. Treaty between the East India Company and His Highness Maharajah 

Pursojee Bhoosla, dated 27th May 1816 ... ... ...101 

XXI. Provisional Agreement between the Ilon’ble Company and Maharajah 

Moodhajee Bhoosla, dated 6 th January 1818 ... ... 100 

XXH. Treaty of perpetual friendship and alliance between the Ilon’blc East 
India Company and His Highness Maharajah Raghojeo Bhoosla, 
dated 1 st December 1826 ... ... ... ... 1 U> 

XXIII. Revised Engagement between the Ilon’ble Company and the Raja of 

Nagpore, dated 26th December 1829 ... ... ... 122 

XXIV. Specimen of the Engagements entered into by the Zemindars of 

Chutteesgurh, dated 17th February 1821 ... ... ... 125 

Ditto ditto Zemindars of Chanda... ... ... ... 127 

Ditto ditto of Sunnuds granted to the Zemindars of Dcogurh, dated 
25th Februaiy 1820 ... ... ... ... 120 

XXV. Engagement between the Government of Nagpore and Mypal Deo, 

Rajah of Bustar, dated 30th March 1819 ... ... ... 133 

Sunnud of Adoption to the Rajahs of Bustar, of Karonde, and of 
Makrai, dated 11th March 1862 ... ... ... 105 


XXVI 



CONTENTS. 


Vll 


PAKT III. 

TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS and SUNNUDS relating to 
BUNDELCUND. • 

Page. 

BUNDELCUND ... ... ... ... 136 to 457 

Lapsed and Confiscated States ... ... 141 to 190 

XXVII. Agreement with Raja Himmut Behadoor, dated 4th September 1803 143 
XXVin. Agreement with Nawab Shumshere Behadoor of Banda, dated 

12 th January 1804 ... ... ... ... 146 

XXIX. Translation of Wajib-ul-urz of the Nawab of Banda with replies, 

dated 31st December 1812 ... ... ... ... 147 

XXX. Engagement concluded between Nana Govind Rao Pundit of Jaloun, 

and Captain John Baillie, dated 23rd October 1806 ... ... 150 

XXXI. Engagement concluded between the British Government and Nana 

Govind Rao of Jaloun, dated 1 st November 1817 ... ... 158 

XXXII. Agreement with Sheo Rao Bhao, Soobadar of Jhansi, dated 6 th 

February 1804 ... ... ... ... ... 164 

Translation of a Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of the Rajah of 
Jhansi, dated 18th November 1803 ... ... ...167 

XYXTTT . Treaty with Rao Ramchund, the minor Soobadar of Jhansi, dated 

17th November 1817 ... ... ... ... 168 

XXXIV. Translation of articles of an engagement entered into with Rajah 

Gungadhur Rao, Chief of Jhansi, dated 27th December 1842 ... 172 

XXXV. Translation of a Sunnud granted to Rajah Kissery Sing, the Rajah of 

Jeitpore, dated 20 th September 1812 ... ... ... 174 

Translation of the Ikrarnamah of Rajah Kissery Sing, the Rajah of 
Jeitpore, dated 13th September 1812 ... ... ... 179 

XXXVI. Wajib-ul-urz presented by Purseram of Khudee, dated 7th October 

1807 ... ... ■ .*• ... ... ... 182 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented by ditto, dated 7th 
October 1807 ... ... ... ... ... 185 

Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 7th October 1807 ... ... 187 

XXXVII. Treaty with Amrut Rao Tiroha, dated 14th August 1803 ... 188 

States in Bundelcund with which the British Government 
has Treaties ... ... ... ... 191 to 226 

xxxvni. Treaty of friendship and defensive alliance between the British 
Government and the Rajah of Rewah and Mookundpore, dated 
5th October 1812 ... ... ... ... ... 195 

XXXIX. Second Treaty between ditto ditto, dated 2 nd June 1813... ... 200 

' Supplemental Article to the above Treaty, dated 25th June 1813 ... 204 
XL. Engagement taken from Lall Zubberdust Sing, Jaghiredar of 

Chourhut ... ... ... ... ... 205 

XXI. Third treaty between the British Government and the Rajah of 

Rewah, dated 11th March 1814 ... ... ...206 



CONTENTS. 


via 


XLIL 

xlhi. 

XXVI. 

XLIV. 

XLV. 

XXVI. 

XLVI. 

xLvn. 

XLvm. 


XLIX. 


L. 


LI. 


LII. 

LUL 

LIV. 


LV. 


LVI. 


Page. 


BUNDELCUND .—( Continued.) 

Sunnud of adoption to Maharajah Rngliooraj Sing of Rcwah, dated 
11 th March 1862 ... ... ... ... ••• 209 

Treaty of friendship and defensive alliance between the British Govern¬ 
ment and the Rajah of Oorcha or Tehree, dated 23rd December 1812 210 
Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Tehree ... ... ... 135 

Treaty between the Rajah of Duttia and Captain Baillie, dated 
15th March 1804... ... ... ... ... 213 

Treaty between the British Government and the Rajah of Duttia, dated 
31st July 1818 ... ... ... ... ... 216 

Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Duttia ... ... ... 135 

Engagement between the British Government and Rajah Runjeet Singh 
of Sumptur, dated 12 thNovember 1817 ... ... ... 221 

Sunnud of adoption granted to Rajah Hindooput of Sumptur, dated 
11 th March 1862 o-. ... ... ... ... 225 

States of Bundelcukd held under Sunnttds ... 227 to 457 

Obligation of Maharajah Eishore Sing of Punnah, dated 4th Pebru^y # 
1807 ... ... ... ... ... ... 254 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated May 1807, ... 257 

Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of ditto, dated 27th March 1811... 258 
Translation of an Ikrarnamah presented by ditto, dated 22 nd March 


1811 ... ... ... ... ... ... 261 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 22nd May 1811 ... 264 

Sunnud of adoption to Rajah Nirput Sing of Punnah, dated 11th 
March 1862 ... ... ... ... ... 266 


Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Dewan Diorich Sing 
of Logassi, dated 9th December 1808 ... ... ... 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance, dated 9th December 1808 ... 268 
Sunnnd granted to Dewan Diorich Sing, 1808 ... ... 070 

Sunnud of adoption to Heera Sing of Logassi, dated 11 th March 1862 271 
Translation of an agreement executed by Rao Heera Sing Bahadoor, 
Jagheerdar of Logassi, dated 25th January 1862 ... ... 272 

Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of Rajah Bejy Bahadoor of Chir- 
kari, dated 29th July 1804 ... ... ... .. f 273 

Obligation of allegiance and fidelity on the part of the above ... 275 

Sunnud or grant of certain districts and villages to the above, dated 
2 nd September 1804 ... ... ... 273 

Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of the Rajah of Chirkari, dated 
25th March 1811 ... ... ... _ 079 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance delivered 
in by Rajah Beker Majeet Bijy Bahadoor, the Rajah of Chirkari, 


dated 25th March 1811 ... ... ... ...281 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 25th March 1811 ... 285 

Sunnud of adoption to Maharajah Jey Sing Deo, of Chirkari, dated 
11thMarch 1862 ... ... ... 



CONTENTS. 


IX 


Page . 

BUNDELCUND.—( Continued .) 

LVII. Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of Rajah Ruttun Sing, of Bijawur... 287 
Translation of the ikrarnamah of ditto, dated 25th March 1811 ... 290 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 26th March 1811 ... 293 

XXVI. Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Bijawur ... ... ...135 

LYIII. Wajib-ul-urz presented by Rajah Bukht Sing of Ajeygurh, dated 

8th June 1807 ... ... ... ... ...295 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance on the part of above, dated 
8th June 1807 ... ... ... ... ... 298 

Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 8th June 1807 ... ...302 

LIX. Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Luchmun Sing of 

Ajeygurh, dated 7th December 1806 ... ... ... 303 

Translation from the Hindee of an additional Wajib-ul-urz on the 
part of Luclimun Sing ... ... ... ...306 

Engagement from Luchmun Sing, dated 9th December 1806 ... 307 

LX. Sunnud granted to Rajah Bukht Sing, dated 25th September 1812 ... 310 
LXI. Sunnud conferring the territory of Ajeygurh with the title of Rajah 
Bahadoor upon Runjore Sing, half brother of the late Rajah Bijy 
Sing, dated 9th September 1859 ... ... ... 312 

XLVII. Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Ajeygurh ... ... ... 225 

LXII. Sunnud granted to Tej Sing, Rajah of Sureela, dated 17th Jan. 1807 312 

XLVn. Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Sureela ... ... ... 225 

LXHI. Translation of Wajib-ul-urz of Rao Prithee Sing, Jaghiredar of Jignee, 

dated llth December 1810 ... ... ... ... 314 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance of Rao Prithee Sing, Jaghire¬ 
dar of ditto, dated 10th December 1810 ... ... ... 317 

Translation of Sunnud granted to ditto, dated llth December 1810... 319 
IXIV. Adoption Sunnud granted to Jaghiredar of Jignee, dated llth March 

1862 ... ... ... ... ... ... 320 

LXV. Obligation of allegiance presented by Dewan Moorut Sing of Jussoo, 

dated 14th June 1816 ... ... ... ... ib . 

Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 13th July 1816 ... ... 323 

LXYI. Sunnud granted to Sutturjeet Sing of ditto, dated 20th January 1862 325 
LXYII. Sunnud of adoption granted to Ram Sing, of Jussoo, dated llth 

March 1862 ... ... ... ... ... ib. 

LXYIII. Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Dewan Joogul Pershad 
of Behree, together with answer returned thereto,dated 25th August 
1809 ... ... ... ... ... ... 326 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented by above, dated 
23rd August 1809 ... ... ... ... ...327 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to Dewan Joogul Pershad of ditto, 
dated 25th August 1809 ... ... ... ... 329 

LXIX. Translation of ditto to ditto, dated 7th January 1811 ... ... 330 

LXX. Sunnud of adoption granted to Bisnath Sing of Behree, dated 

llth March 1862 ... ... ... ... ... 332 



CONTENTS. 


Page. 

* BIINDELCUND.— 

LXXI. Paper of requests presented on the part of Koour Sonee Sah of 

Chutterpore, dated 16th March 1806 ... ... ... 333 

Ikramamah presented by ditto, dated 4th April 1806 ... ... 337 

Translation of the Snnnud granted to Koour Sonee Sah, dated 
19th March 1806 ... ... ... ... ...338 

LXXTT . Translation of Wajib-ul-urz presented by Koour Pertab Sing, dated 

28th July 1816 ... ... ... ... ...340 

Translation of an obligation of allegiance presented by Koour Pertab 
Sing, dated 15th July 1816 ... ... ... ...343 

Sunnud granted to Koour Pertab Sing under the signature of the 
Governor-General in Council, dated 11 th January 1817 ... 346 

Agreement signed by the brothers of ditto ... ...348 

Sunnud given to the brothers of ditto under the signature of the 
Superintendent of Political Affairs, 1817 .. ... ...349 

Sunnud granting the State of Chutterpore to Juggut Raj, dated 
5th September 1854 ... ... ... # *., 350 

Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Chutterpore ... ... 225 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented 
by Rajan Mohun Sing of Beronda, dated 21 st June 1807 ... 351 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto ... ... ...354 

Adoption Sunnud to the Rajah of Beronda ... ... ...135 

Wajib-ul-urz presented on the part of the Killadar Chobey Deriao Sing 355 
Obligation of allegiance on the part of ditto, killadar of the Fortress of 
Calinger, 1806 ... ... ... ... 358 

Translation of the Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests of the Chobey 


T.TTTTT 

XLVU. 

LXXIY. 


XXVI. 

LXXY. 


LXXYI. 


LXXVII, 

LXX. 

Lxxvin. 


LXX. 

lxxtx. 


Deriao Sing, and replies to the same, dated 4th July 1812 
Ditto ditto of the other Chobeys, dated 4th July 1812 ... 

Ditto ditto of Gopal Lall Vakeel, dated 4th July 1812 ... 

Translation of the ikrarnamah of the Chobey family, dated 19th June 
1812 

Sunnuds granted to ditto, dated 4th July 1812 
Sunnud granted to Gopaul Lall, dated 4th July 1812 
Sunnud to Chobey Newul Kishore, dated 11th January 1817 

Adoption Sunnuds to the Calinger Chobeys ... 

Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Dewan Aperbul 
and Dewan Chuthary of Behut, dated 22nd September 1807 ... OOJ . 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance, dated 22nd September 1807 ... 383 
Sunnud granted to Dewan Aperbul Sing 
Adoption Sunnud to the Chief of Behut 

Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Dewau Pertab Sing 
of Alipoora, dated 1st February 1808 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance on the part of ditto, dated 
22nd September 1807 

38ft 

Surnrnd granted to ditto 

... 390 


360 

366 

369 

370 
373 

378 

379 
332 

381 


385 
332 

386 



CONTENTS. 


XI 


. Page . 

BUNDELCUND.--( Continued.') 

LXIV. Adoption Sunnud to the Chief of Alipoora ... ... ...320 

LXXX. Translation of a Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by Laul 

Dhooniaput of Kotee, dated 17th August 1810 ... ...391 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented to 
ditto, dated 16th August 1810 .. ... ... ...393 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 17th August 1810 ... 397 
LXX. Adoption Sunnud to the chief of Kotee ... ... ...332 

LXXXI. Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented 
by Laul Shew Raj Sing of Oucheerah or Nagode, dated 11th March 
1809* ... ... \.. ... ... ... 398 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 20th March 1809 ... 401 
LXXXn. Translation of a Sunnud granted to Rajah Rughobind Sing of Nagode 

and Oucheerah, dated 27th December 1838 ... ... 403 

LXXXm. Translation of a Sunnud granting a jaghire to the Rajah of Nagode, 

dated 22nd October 1859 ... ... ... ... 404 

r XXVI. Adoption Sunnud to the Chief of Nagode ... ... ... 135 

LXXXIV. Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance., presented 

by Laul Amaun Sing of Sohawul and Rygawun, dated 16th July 1809 405 
Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 18th July 1809 ... 408 

XXVI. Adoption Sunnud to the Chief of Sohawul ... ... ... 135 

LXXXV. Translation of a Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by 

Raja Ram of G-orihar, dated 29th November 1807 ... ... 409 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance entered 
into by ditto, dated 29th November 1807 ... ... ... 413 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 29th November 1807 415 
LII. Adoption Sunnud to the chief of Gorihar ... ... ...271 

LXXXVI. Translation of a Wajib-ul-urz or paper of requests presented by 

Dewan Gopaul Sing of Gerowli ... ... ...417 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance entered 
into by ditto, dated 24th Eebruaiy 1812 ... ... ... 422 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 24th February 1812 424 
LXX. Adoption Sunnud to the chief of Gerowli ... ... ... 332 

LXXXVII. Translation of a Wajib-ul-urz. or paper of requests presented by 
Kooar Luchmun Sing of Nyagaon Rebai, dated 19th September 

1807 ... ... ... ... ... ... 426 

Translation of an ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance presented 
by ditto ... .... ... ... ... 428 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 19th September 1807 430 
LXX. Adoption Sunnud to the Chief of Nyagaon Rebai ... ...332 

LXXXVm. Translation of an engagement taken from Thakoor Dooijun Sing of 

Myhere, dated 17th October 1806 ... ... ... 431 

Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 18th November 1806 433 
LXXXIX. Translation of an engagement taken from ditto, dated 13th February 

1814 ... ... ... ••• ... ... 434 



xii 


CONTENTS. 


Vtujc. 


BTJNDELCUND.—( Continued.) 


XC. 


XCI. 

XXVI. 

xcn. 


XCIII. 

XCIV. 

LXX. 

XCV. 

XXVI. 


Translation of a Sunnud granted to Thakoor Boorjnn Sing of Myhere, 
dated 18th March 1814 

Translation of the engagement taken from Thakoor Bishen Sing of 
Myhere, dated 18th December 1826 
Translation of a Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 2nd March 182/ 
Ikrarnamah of ditto, dated 25th February 1849 
Adoption Sunnud to the chief of Myhere ... 

Translation of a paper of requests delivered by the Nabob Nussecr- 
ood-Dowla of Baonee 

From the above to the Governor-General, dated 15tli November 180G 
From the Governor-General to the Nabob, dated 24th December 1806 


437 


438 

441 

442 
133 


443 

448 

449 


Sunnud of adoption granted to Nawab Mehdi Hussun Khan Imamood 


Dowlah of Baonee, dated 11th March 1862 ... ... 450 

Engagements given in by the Husht Bhya Jaghiredars, dated 27th 
November 1821 ... ... ... ... ••• 

Sunnud granted to ditto, dated 11th April 1823 ... ~ "... 452 

Adoption Sunnuds to the Husht Bhya Jaghiredars ... ... 332 

Ikrarnamah or obligation of allegiance of Guman Sing, Jaghiredar of 
Kunnya Dbana, dated 1st August 1863 ... ... ... 455 

Adoption Sunnud to tbe Jaghiredar of Kunnya Dhana ... ... 135 


APPENDICES. 

1. Schedule of Villages granted to the Rajah of Punnah in 

2. Ditto ditto ditto in 1811. 

3. Ditto ditto to Rajah of Chirkari in 1804. 

4. Ditto ditto ditto in 1811. 

5. Ditto ditto to Rajah of Bijawiu* in 1811. 

6. Ditto ditto to Rajah of Ajeygurh in 1812. 

7. Ditto ditto to Moorat Sing of Jussoo in 1816. 

8. Ditto ditto to the Rajah of Cliutterpore in 1817. 

9. Ditto ditto to Rajah of Beronda in 1807. 

10. Ditto ditto claimed by Duriao Sing Chobey in 1806. 

11. Ditto ditto granted to Chief of Alipoora in 1808. 

12. Ditto ditto to tbe Chief of Kotee in 1810. 

13. Ditto ditto to the Chief of Nagode in 1809. 

14. Ditto ditto to the Chief of Sohawul in 1809. 

15. Ditto ditto to the Chief of Myhere in 1814. 

16. Ditto ditto ditto in 1827. 

17. Ditto ditto claimed by Nawab of Baonee in 1806. 



PART I. 


TREATIES, ENfiAGEIEMS, AND’SUUNUDS 

RELATING- TO 


THE PEISHWA. 


Sevajee, the founder* of the Maliratta power, began his career 
as a plundering bandit at the early age of seventeen, and at the time 
of his death in 1682, he had established his power over the greater 
part of the Concan. He had few pretensions beyond those of a success¬ 
ful rebel against the declining Mahomedan power.* Most of his 
possessions were wrested from his son and successor, Sambajee, who 
was taken prisoner by Aurungzeb and cruelly put to death, and 
whose son, Sabo or Sahojee, w r as carried into captivity. But the 
efforts of the Emperor to subdue the Mahrattas, in which he per¬ 
severed till his death in 1707, were unavailing. For although he suc¬ 
ceeded in taking most of their forts, the Mahrattas under different 
leaders revenged and enriched themselves by incursions into the im¬ 
perial dominions, and overran the whole country south of the Nerbuclda. 


* A Treaty appears to have been concluded with him in 1674, which is thus described by 
Grant Duff :— 

“ The Treaty consisted of twenty Articles, the substance of which the Mahrattas have pre¬ 
served under four heads :—“ First, indemnification for the losses at Rajapore, with permission 
to establish factories at Rajapore, Dabnl, Choule, and Kallian, and to trade all over Sevajec’s 
territory, buying and selling at their own prices, without being liable to the imposition of 
fixed rates. Second , they were only to- pay an import duty of 2§ per cent, ad valorem. 
Third, coins were to pass reciprocally ; and, fourth, wrecks were to be restored —History 
of the Mahrattas , vol p. 264, 

VOL. III. 



2 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS, 


iwa -^e ib-judged bigotry of Aurungzeb, in provoking* by religious per- 

-secution the Rajpoot princes of Malwa, favored the cause of the 

Mahratta invaders. But it was chiefly during the weak reign of 
Mahomed Shah that the Mahratta supremacy was extended. 

Sahojee was released from captivity on the death of Aurungzeb, 
hut on his return to the Deccan, he found himself opposed by his 
cousin, Sevajee, and his aunt, Tara Bai. By the ability of his Minis¬ 
ter Ballajee Biswanath, Sahojee succeeded in recovering his rights. 
Being addicted to ease and pleasure, Sahojee, nominally the head of 
the Mahratta power, established himself at Sattara, of which place 
his successors became titular Rajahs; while the real authority and 
actual supremacy in the Mahratta confederacy devolved on Ballajee, 
in whose family the office of Peishwa became, as offices under the 
Mahratta rule usually did become, hereditary. 

Ballajee Biswanath died in April 1720, and was succeeded by his 
son, Bajee Rao, who held office for twenty years. The armies of 
Bajee Rao ravaged Guzerat, and completely reduced Malwa, of 
which province Bajee Rao was created Soubadar by the Emperor of 
Delhi, being aided in this by the policy of the Nizam, who wished to 
interpose the Mahrattas as a barrier between the court of Delhi and 
his own possessions. After overrunning Bundelcund and Hindostan, 
and exacting a promise of chout or a fourth of the revenue of the 
Delhi Empire, Bajee Rao returned to his southern possessions. lie 
died in 1740, on the banks of the Nerbudda, when marching to renew 
his depredations in Hindostan. A year before his death, the British 
Government concluded a Treaty (No. I.) with him, principally of a 
commercial nature. 

Bajee Rao left three sons, Ballajee Bajee Rao, Ragoba, and Shum- 
sher Bahadoor, an illegitimate son by a Mahomedan woman. The 
last succeeded to the Peishwa’s possessions in Bundelcund, and his 
descendants became the titular Nawabs of Banda. Ballajee Bajee 
Rao, commonly called Nana Sahib, succeeded his father in the office 
of Peishwa, after’ some opposition from Ragojee Bhonsla and the 
Guikwar, and on his accession he went through the mock ceremony 
of receiving investiture from the hands of the nominal Rajah Saho. 
He was of an inactive disposition, and entrusted his internal Govern¬ 
ment to his cousin, Sedasheo Rao Bhow, and the command of 
his armies to his brother, Rogonath Rao or Ragoba. In 1755, an 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 3 

it (No. II.) was made with Ballajee Rao for an expedition to 
le power of Angria, who had established his authority 
)oncan coast within the Mahratta territory, and had be- 
formidable by his piratical .depredations that the British 
ent found it necessary to take vigorous measures for his 
n, in which they were willingly assisted by the Mahrattas. 
igholds of the pirates were taken and their treasure cap- 
a combined force under Clive and Admiral Watson in 
n the conclusion of the expedition, a Treaty (No III,) was 
h the Peishwa, which, besides securing certain commercial 
is, excluded the Dutch from the trade of the Mahratta 
3 , and gave the English possession of ten villages, including 

time of Bajee Eao, the chiefs Scindia and Holkar had risen 
‘position to be the principal leaders of the Mahratta armies 
joba. The whole of Malwa was divided between them and 
hiredars, of whom Anund Rao Puar of Dhar was the princi- 
s Mahratta influence was now supreme at Delhi, where the 
s of the court had invited their interference. In 1758 the 
conquests were extended as far as Lahore and Mooltan by 
But these aggressions provoked the fifth invasion of Ahmed 
lalli, at whose hands the Mahrattas sustained a disastrous 
Paniput, which for a time destroyed their power in Northern 
?his defeat was to some extent occasioned by a temporary 
of functions between Ragoba and Sedasheo Eao Bhow. 
lwa survived this disaster only a few months. 

5ahib was succeeded by his second son, Madho Eao Bullal, 
years of age, under the regency of his uncle Eagoba. 
ifter his accession, his territories being threatened by the 
le Peishwa became desirous to settle some existing disputes 
British which had arisen in consequence of attacks made 
.dee of Jinjeera, an ally of the British Government. The 
vere adjusted by Treaty (No. IY.) Negociations were also 
ito by the Mahrattas with a view to obtain military assistance 
British, but they were suddenly broken off, the Mahrattas 
the meantime come to terms with the Nizam, 
long endeavored to keep Madho Rao in a state of depend- 
; the talents and address of the latter enabled him to 


THE 

PEISHWA. 



4 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


B assume the administration, which he held for eleven years. lie died 
—— in 1772 without issue. The year before his death the influence of 
the Mahrattas was re-established in Upper India by Scindia, vho 
overran Rohilcund, detached the Emperor Shah Alim fioni alliance 
with the English, and replaced him on the throne of Delhi wlieie he 
held him in a state of tutelage. 

The death of Madho Rao was followed by the murder of his brother 
and successor, Narain Rao, and the usurpation of Ragoba. A revolu¬ 
tionary party was formed by the chief Ministers of the State in favor 
of Gunga Bai, widow of Narain Rao, who, after her husband’s murder, 
gave birth to a son, Madho Rao Narain. Ragoba, on the other hand, 
strengthened his position by negociations with Scindia, Holkar, and 
the British. Being deserted by Scindia and Holkar, Ragoba was fain 
to purchase the assistance of the British by ceding Bassein, the island 
of Salsette, and other islands on the Bombay coast, which tfie*English 
had long but unsuccessfully endeavored to obtain, and of which they 
had recently taken possession in anticipation of their being occupied 
by the Portuguese. The arrangements made were reduced to the 
* form of a Treaty (No. Y.) on 6th March 1775. Out of this Treaty 
arose the first Mahratta war. 

The force which was sent to assist Ragoba gained some unimportant 
successes, which so pleased Ragoba that he presented to the English 
the districts of Humot and Amod, then estimated to yield Rs. 2,77,000 
a year. But the successes of Ragoba were short lived. The Supreme 
Government in Bengal disapproved of the Treaty, and declared it 
invalid, and deputed an agent of their own, Colonel Upton, to negoci- 
ate with the ruling ministerial party at Poona. On 1st March 1776 
Colonel Upton concluded the Treaty of Poorundah (No. VI.); but 
two of its Articles were afterwards erased by mutual consent, and an 
additional clause added. This Treaty established peace between the 
British Government and the ministerial party, and dissolved the alliance 
with Ragoba, who vainly attempted to maintain the alliance by offering 
to cede the whole Concan and ten per cent, of all the jao-hircs of 
the Mahratta empire. 

In the meantime the ministerial party split into two factions, one 
headed by Nana Furnavese and Scindia, in support of the young 
Peiskwa, and the other by Moraba, the cousin of Nana Furnavese, 
who was supported by Holkar and the adherents of Ragoba at Poona. 



TBEATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNITDS. 


5 


vacillation of Holkar the party of Nana Furnavese gained 
flete ascendancy. Nana Furnavese not only obstructed the “ 
fc of the Treaty of Poorundah* but was believed to have made 
igreement with the French, which endangered the possessions 
nglish in the west of India; and as Moraba’s party invited the 
iion of the English* it was therefore resolved to make a new 
with Ragoba on the terms of the Treaty of 1775* but on the 
nding that he was to be placed in power merely as Regent for 
g Peishwa during his minority. The new Treaty (No. VII.) 
joba was concluded on 24th November 1778. 

>ombay force* which was to establish Ragoba in the Regency, 
l towards Poona without waiting for the column which was 
5 to their support from Bengal under Colonel Goddard. At 
a they were met by the whole Mahratta force* their retreat 
off* and they were compelled to subscribe the disgraceful 
ion of Wargaoxx (No. VIII.), surrendering the whole of the 
acquired by the Bombay Government since the death of 
:tao Bullal. The army was allowed to retreat after giving 
;ages for the fulfilment of the Engagement. The validity of 
ivention was disavowed* and Colonel Goddard* who reached 
early in 1779, was instructed to endeavor to negociate a 
ith the Poona State on the terms of the Treaty of Poorundah* 

. provision for the exclusion of the French from the Mahratta 
es. 

nations were continued for several months* but eventually 
ss were commenced* as the Mahratta insisted on the restoration 
tte and the surrender of Ragoba as preliminaries to any 
After some successes were obtained in the Concan and 
the British Government* having received intelligence that a 
:acy had been formed against them by Hyder Ali* the Nizam 
Mahrattas deemed it expedient to make proposals for peace, 
jah of Berar was detached from the alliance* and a separate 
was made with Scindia* who agreed to use his influence to 
bout a general peace. The negociations resulted in the con- 
of the Treaty of Salbye (No. IX.) in 1782* by which peace 
tored between the Peishwa and the English and their respect- 
33 ; the English were to abstain from the support and protec- 
Ragoba* who was to receive a provision from the Peishwa; all 


THE 

PEISHWA.' 



6 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

he territories conquered from the Peishwa subsequent to the conclusion 

-of the Treaty of Poorundah were restored; the Nizam and Hyder 

Ali were to he made to restore the territories they had taken from 
the English; and Scindia became guarantee for the due fulfilment of 
the Treaty by the contracting parties. Ragoba survived the con¬ 
clusion of this Treaty only a few months. The interpretation of the 
11th Article of the above Treaty relating to maritime intercourse 
was defined by a supplementary Treaty (No. X.) on 26th April 17833. 
which further provided that no protection should be given by either 
party to fugitives from the territory of the other. 

Hyder Ali died in December 1782, but his son, Tippoo, although 
professing acquiescence in the terms of the Treaty of Salbye, con¬ 
tinued the war with the English; and a new Treaty (No. XI.) was- 
concluded in October 1783 between Scindia and the English on the 
one part, and the Peishwa on the other, to enforce his submission in. 
accordance with the 9th Article of the Treaty of Salbye. Before 
the provisions of this Treaty could be carried out, the Madras Govern¬ 
ment had made peace with Tippoo by the Treaty of Mangalore. This 
Treaty, which was concluded without the concurrence of the Peishwa, 
the Mahrattas affected to consider a violation of the Treaty of Salbye* 
but the ambitious designs which the leaders of the Mahratta parties 
now began separately to entertain reconciled them to the arrange¬ 
ments which had been made. 

On the first appearance of a rupture with Tippoo in 1790, Lord 
Cornwallis directed his attention to an alliance with the Peishwa. A 
Treaty (No. XII.) of offensive and defensive alliance was concluded,, 
to which the Nizam was admitted. The Treaty of Seringapatam, 
concluding peace with Tippoo, put the Peishwa in possession of one- 
third of the territories conquered from Tippoo, yielding an annual 
revenue of 13,16,000 pagodas. After this, Hurree Punt, the com¬ 
mander of the Mahratta army, proposed to subsidize a British force 
for the purpose of reducing any refractory dependents of the Peishwa. 
But the proposal was rejected. The jealousy with which the Mah¬ 
ratta powers now began to view the increased ascendancy of the 
British Government led the Peishwa to reject the proposals of Lord 
Cornwallis for a mutual guarantee between the British Govern¬ 
ment, the Nizam, and the Peishwa, against the future aggressions of 
Tippoo. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


7 


hief Mahratta leaders had now become allies rather than 
Lts of the Peishwa. Separate Treaties had been concluded by ■ 
sh Government with the Rajah of Berar, the Guikwar, and 
and it is only as confederacies of equals acting against a 
enemy that the Mahratta chiefs again appear united. The 
ence of Scindia was virtually recognized by the Treaty of 
and his separate conquests in Northern India and Malwa, 
nominally held by him as deputy of the Peishwa, gave him 
:ol over the court at Poona. 

oung Peishwa, Madho Rao, died on 27th October 1795, and 
t was followed by dissensions which threatened the dissolution of 
ratta confederacy. . These dissensions resulted in the establish- 
Bajee Rao, the son of Ragoba, as Peishwa, through the military 
f Doulut Rao Scindia, who used his ascendancy among the 
\ chiefs to defeat the negociations of the British Government 
.liance with Poona. After the fall of Seringapatam in 1799, 
of the conquered territories of Mysore, yielding 2,63,000 
was offered to the Peishwa, on condition that the grant 
orm the basis of a new Treaty similar to. that which the 
Government had concluded with the Nizam. But under the 
> of Scindia the offer was rejected, and the territory was divided 
the British Government and the Nizam. 

\ war which broke out between Scindia and Holkar in 1801, 
jd forces of Scindia and the Peishwa received a severe defeat 
25th October 1802. The crisis was opportune for the re- 
ment of British influence at Poona, and overtures for a 
•y force made by Bajee Rao, who had-fled from Poona on 
approach, were favorably received. On 31st December 1802, 
brated Treaty of Bassein (No. XIII.) was signed. By this 
he Peishwa was to receive a subsidiary force of six battalions 
ns, and was to cede for their payment territory of the value 
ies 26,00,000. The Peishwa was to refer to the British 
nent all his disputes with the Nizam, and his claims against 
kwar, and was to be re-established by the British Govern- 
his full rights as head of the Mahratta confederacy. A 
of the territory thus ceded was afterwards exchanged for 
the Peishwa’s possessions in Bundelkund, and these arrange- 
vere embodied in Supplementary Articles to the Treaty on 


THE 

PEISHWA. 



8 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUD3. 


[WA. 


16th December 1803. Bajee Rao was re-seated on the Mnsnud 
at Poona on 13th May 1802. Iiolkar fled on the approach of the 
British force, and Scindia, after hesitatingly expressing his acqui¬ 
escence in the arrangements to be made under the Treaty of Basscin, 
in which he saw the destruction of his scheme for obtaining control 
over the Poona Government, changed his plans, and formed a league 
with the Rajah of Berar to defeat the Treaty. The campaigns 
against these Mahratta chiefs in 1803, and Iiolkar in 1805, com¬ 
pletely broke up the Mahratta confederacy, and established once for all 
the supremacy of the British power in India. The territories then 
conquered from Scindia and the Rajah of Berar were distributed 
between the British Government, the Peishwa, and the Nizam, by the 
Partition Treaty of Poona in 1804 (No. XIV.) The Peishwa’s share 
was the city and province of Ahmednuggur. 

For many years nothing occurred to interrupt the friendly relations 
between the British Government and the Peishwa, although the latter 
was somewhat dissatisfied with the terms of the settlement of his 
claims over the petty jaghiredars within his dominions, by which his 
powers to oppress them were limited, and they were guaranteed in 
their territories so long as they fulfilled their original engagements 
to the Poona State. But in 1815 difficulties arose from the trea¬ 
cherous conduct of the Peishwa and his Minister, Trimbukjcc Anglia. 
By the Treaty of Bassein the British Government were constituted 
arbiters between the Peishwa and the Guikwar. For the settlement of 
die heavy claims of the Peishwa, which were brought forward in 
ursuance of a scheme to revive the old Mahratta policy at which 
ajee Rao began to aim, the Minister of the Guikwar, Gungadhur 
lastree, a staunch friend of the British Government, was invited 
Poona under a guarantee from the British Government of his per¬ 
il safety. He was there basely assassinated at the instigation of 
bukjee, the Peishwa himself not being above suspicion of 
Ration in the crime. Bajee Rao was compelled reluctantly 
•encler his favorite Minister, who was imprisoned in the 
Tanna. Trimbukjee escaped in September 1816, and was 
by the Peishwa, who, while pretending the greatest zeal 
mdship of the British Government, was making extensive 
for war, and had opened negociations with Holkar, 
Ld the Pindarees. When these facts were discovered. 



s 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


IE 

IWA. 


16th December 1803. Bajee Rao was re-seated on the Musnud 
'at Poona on 13th May 1802. Holkar fled on the approach of the 
British force, and Scindia, after hesitatingly expressing his acqui¬ 
escence in the arrangements to be made under the Treaty of Bassein, 
in which he saw the destruction of his scheme for obtaining control 
over the Poona Government, changed his plans, and formed a league 
with the Rajah of Berar to defeat the Treaty. The campaigns 
against these Mahratta chiefs in 1803, and Holkar in 1805, com¬ 
pletely broke up the Mahratta confederacy, and established once for all 
the supremacy of the British power in India. The territories then 
conquered from Scindia an,d the Rajah of Berar were distributed 
between the British Government, the Peishwa, and the Nizam, by the 
Partition Treaty of Poona in 1804 (No. XIV.) The Peishwa’s share 
was the city and province of Ahmednuggur. 

For many years nothing occurred to interrupt the friendly relations 
between the British Government and the Peishwa, although the latter 
was somewhat dissatisfied with the terms of the settlement of his 
claims over the petty jaghiredars within his dominions, by which his 
powers to oppress them were limited, and they were guaranteed in 
their territories so long as they fulfilled their original engagements 
to the Poona State. But in 1815 difficulties arose from the trea¬ 
cherous conduct of the Peishwa and his Minister, Trimbukjee Anglia, 
By the Treaty of Bassein the British Government were constituted 
arbiters between the Peishwa and the Guikwar. For the settlement of 
the heavy claims of the Peishwa, which were brought forward in 
pursuance of a scheme to revive the old Mahratta policy at which 
Bajee Rao began to aim, the Minister of the Guikwar, Gungadhur 
Shastree, a staunch friend of the British Government, was invited 
to Poona under a guarantee from the British Government of his per¬ 
sonal safety. He was there basely assassinated at the instigation of 
Trimbukjee, the Peishwa himself not being above suspicion of 
participation in the crime. Bajee Rao was compelled reluctantly 
to surrender his favorite Minister, who was imprisoned in the 
Fort of Tanna. Trimbukjee escaped in September 1816, and was 
concealed by the Peishwa, who, while pretending the greatest zeal 
for the friendship of the British Government, was making extensive 
preparations for war, and had opened negociations with Holkar, 
Nagpore, and the Pindarees. When these facts were discovered. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


9 


hwa was informed that by his conduct he had grossly violated 
igements; the subsidiary force was marched upon Poona; * 
ee Rao was required to surrender three of his strongest forts, 
ubscribe a Treaty (No XV.) dictated to him by the British 
aent. The principal provisions of this Treaty were obligations 
and deliver up Trimbukjee, to cede lands in lieu of the contin- 
ntained under the Treaty of Bassein, to compromise his claims 
Sruikwar, to acknowledge the settlements made with the subor- 
ighiredars in 1812, and to abstain from diplomatic intercourse 
sign powers. 

fstem of non-interference which the Government had followed 
al India and Malwa greatly strengthened the Pindaree hordes, 
L816 their inroads into British territory made necessary a 
in the policy of Government. The Pindarees looked much 
support of the Mahratta chiefs. But Scindia was detached 
nr cause by the Treaty of 1817, Ameer Khan was gained 
being guaranteed in his territories, the force of Holkar 
ken in the battle of Mehidpore, and after a harrassing 
Pindarees were completely broken up and their chiefs 
Lnconditionally to surrender. In the meantime Bajee Eao, 

; under the humiliation to which he was subjected by the 
Treaty, took advantage of the Pindaree war to break off 
lection with the British Government. On 5th September 
fter having secretly made extensive preparations for war, 
enly attacked and plundered the Residency at Poona. After 
;ory campaign, in which Bajee Rao continued cleverly to 
le British troops, he was reduced to the utmost distress, and 
1818 offered to throw himself on the generosity of the British 
nent. He was offered, and he accepted, terms (No. XVI.), 
h he resigned his sovereign power, and agreed to reside at 
ot on the Ganges, receiving an allowance of Rupees 8,00,000 
Bithoor, near Cawnpore, was selected as the place of his 
residence. The residents within the jaghire which was 
. to him at Bithoor were exempted from subjection to the 
r civil and criminal courts of the country by Regulation I. 

Rao died on 28th January 1851. He bequeathed all his 
Y to his adopted son, Dhoondoo Punt Nana, who was recognized 

III. B 


THE 

PEISHWA. 



io 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNtTDS. 


iwa. ^y British Government as liis heir. No portion of the pension 
"J t ” granted to Bajee Bao was continued to his family. The jaghire 
at Bithoor, however, was continued for the life of Dhoondoo Punt, but 
the residents were made subject to the ordinary civil and criminal 
courts. Dhoondoo Punt is the notorious Nana Sahib who presided 
at the massacre at Cawnpore and took a leading part in the rebellion 
of 1857. His fate is uncertain. 


No. i. 

'Treaty with the Mahrattas in 1739, 

Articles of Agreement between Stephen Stipulations between the Government 
Law, Governor of Bombay, &c., on the of Bajeerow, Pundit Purdan, in the 
part of the Honorable English East India year 1140 of the Gentoo Style (Anno 
Company, and Bajeerow, Pundit Purdan Domini 1739) and the Honorable Ste- 
or first Minister of the Most Serene phen Law, General of the Port of 
Sou Rajah, July 1739, or 1140, Gentoo Bombay, delivered to Captain Inehbird, 
Style. his Deputy, in Bassein. 

- Article I. 

The English shall only issue The English shall give their 
passes to the Company’s vessels, pass and colours to the vessels 
the merchants or servants, depend- belonging to the port of Bom- 
ents, belonging to the island of bay, to the Company, or other 
Bombay, or other places where merchants, as customary, but 
the English have settlement; and not to vessels belonging to those 
the English shall not interfere with of foreign ports, who, taking 
Bajeerow’s fleet, nor give convoy pass from our Government, may 
to foreign vessels; save that if two navigate and carry on their 
or three vessels should accident- trade freely. Those who shall 
ally fall into company with the not take our pass shall be chas- 
English, in such case Bajeerow’s tised by us, and the English 
fleet shall not molest them. shall not oppose the execution. 

The English Government shall 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


II 


not, as aforesaid, give their pass 
or colours to foreign merchants, 
or convoy vessels belonging to 
foreign ports not having passes 
from this State. Our fleet will 
not harm two or three vessels 
belonging to foreign ports, if 
by chance they come under 
convoy of the English fleet, 
whilst they continue under that 
convoy. 


Article II. 


The English, nor their subjects 
or dependents, shall not freight or 
put their effects on board any ves¬ 
sels not provided with passes from 
Bajeerow; but if any unavoidable 
necessity obliges them to the con¬ 
trary of this, in case of such effects 
being seized by Bajeerow’s fleet, 
they shall be restored to the owners, 
they proving their property therein. 


The English shall not freight 
their effects, or those of their 
jurisdiction, on vessels not hav¬ 
ing passes from this State, and 
shall only freight those that have 
our pass; but in case of such a 
freight through pure necessity, 
and the effects should be seized 
by our fleets, on proof . being 
made that they belong to the 
English or their merchants, 
they shall be restored and deli¬ 
vered up. 


Article III. 


The English will not lay any 
restraint on the inhabitants of other 
countries that have taken refuge 
in Bombay, in the war time, let 
them be coolies, carpenters, or other 
caste whatever, from returning to 
their abodes with their effects and 
gallivats. 


The English shall lay no re¬ 
straint on the inhabitants, coolies, 
carpenters, and all castes of 
people belonging to the jurisdic¬ 
tion of Bassein up to Demaun 
and other places whatever, that 
retired to Bombay, but shall let 
them come away with their 
effects and gallivats. 


THl 
PEISH 1 
No. 1 



12 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E 

WA. 

L 


Article IV. 

The English will furnish two The fishing gallivats that 
fighting gallivats, if required, to carry provisions or goods to and 
give convoy to the fishing gallivats from Versova, shall be conVey- 
of Bajeerow, carrying goods or ed in their passage, coming and 
provisions, in their passage to and going, between Versova and 
from Mahim and Versova. Mahim, by the English. 

Article V. 


The English will grant free li¬ 
cense for the export of all goods 
and commodities whatever, for the 
service of Bajeerow, and a free 
trade to the merchants of his coun¬ 
try, in all sorts they may want, 
as iron, lead, brimstone, saltpetre, 
dammar, tar, sail-cloth, coir, and 
others (excepting artillery, balls, 
powder, and shot), they paying the 
customary duties. Such things as 
have not before been used to pay 
export duty shall continue free of 
any as before. In like manner, 
Bajeerow shall permit the English 
and their merchants the free trade 
of his country and liberty of export 
of goods and provisions, paying the 
customs. 


All sorts of merchandize or 
goods (except artillery, powder, 
balls and shells) that the State 
may want, such as iron, lead, 
brimstone, saltpetre <9 ^dammar, 
coir, cloth for sails, and other 
sorts, shall be freely supplied us : 
and there shall be, in no wise, 
any impediment given to the 
merchants of this jurisdiction 
in their procuring the above 
sorts, or denial from the mer¬ 
chants or the Company; and 
when exported, they shall only 
pay the customary duties that 
such goods have been commonly 
rated at, and they shall pay no 
customs on those that were not be¬ 
fore liable to any. In the same 
manner there shall be no impedi¬ 
ment given the English, the Com¬ 
pany, or their merchants in their 
buying any goods or provisions 
from this jurisdiction, or export¬ 
ing the same, paying the customs. 


Article VI. 

The English will preserve their All the command and domi- 
dominion of the river of Mahim, as nion vjhich the Government of 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


13 


it was granted them by the Portu¬ 
guese. All the 'merchants’ vessels 
and fishing gallivats belonging to 
Bajeerow’s Government shall have 
free passage through the said river, 
and five or ten sepoys, with their 
arms, shall be allowed to pass, 
being on board merchant vessels, on 
any service, or employed to bring 
intelligence. 


Article 

The English will not assist any 
of Bajeerow’s enemies, though in 
friendship with them, with any other 
or more of the sorts than what 
they "engage to supply Bajeerow’s 
State with; and Bajeerow shall 
observe the like agreement with 
the English. 


Article 

Any person belonging to the 
English or Bajeerow’s jurisdiction, 
that shall go over to either Govern¬ 
ment, such Government shall oblige 
him to make satisfaction to his 


Bombay has in the river, from ^ 
Mahim to Bombay, since the time ~ 
it was delivered to them by the 
Portuguese, shall be preserved 
in the same manner as has been 
practised from the beginning. 
All other commands or dominions 
they may have increased since, by 
means of their power, shall not be 
allowed. They shall grant free 
passage through the said river 
to all merchant vessels and fish¬ 
ing gallivats that carry goods 
to and fro (except those belong¬ 
ing to our fleet). They shall 
suffer five or ten sepoys to pass 
with their arms, that may be in 
the said vessels, on any service, 
or sent to bring intelligence. . 

VII. 

The English shall not give 
assistance of any sort to the 
enemies of this State, though 
they may be their friends. 

In like manner, we will not 
assist the enemies to the Eng¬ 
lish. All the sorts they supply 
this State with, they may 
furnish others as they please, 
excepting munitions of war. 

VIII 

Any person, of either side, 
taking refuge under either Go¬ 
vernment, let him be merchant 
or in pay, and owing or carry¬ 
ing money away with him, the 



14 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E creditors. If a slave, he shall he creditor ol such person shall 
y—~ delivered up by compulsion. go where he is, and proving the 

debt by the arbitration of five 
persons, the money shall be deli¬ 
vered to the owner, and the 
person sued shall have liberty 
to go freely where he pleases; 
but if a slave, he shall be deli¬ 
vered up by force. 

Article IX. 

Any vessel belonging to the Any vessel, great or small* 
English or Bajeerow, that shall be belonging to either Government, 
driven by stress of weather, or that by stress of weather shall 

" r r 

other accidents, for shelter on the be driven for shelter to the 
coast of either jurisdiction, all possi- coast under either jurisdiction, 
ble assistance shall be given for the shall receive all possible assist- 
refittal; but if stranded or wrecked ance, and the masts, yards, and 
on either shore, half of the cargo and apparel that may have suffered 
vessel shall belong to the Govern- be refitted, and proceed freely 
ment, and the other half be reserved on her voyage. But in case the 
to the owner. Company’s or their merchants* 

effects shall be shipwrecked on 
any place of our jurisdiction, one- 
half shall be restored to the 
owners, and one-half shall remain 
to the State. In like manner the 
effects on board any vessels of 
our jurisdiction, that may be lost 
at Bombay, shall be divided, 
half to the Company and half 
to the owners. 

Article X. 

The fleet of Bajeerow shall not Our fleet will not harm any 
attempt any vessel, though not pro- vessel navigating without a pass 
vided with his pass, within the from this State, from the stakes 
limits of the stakes at Mahim, in a at Mahim, in a direct line to the. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNt’DS. 


15 


direct line to the mouth of the har- bar at the mouth of the harbour. 

“ PE' 

hour, within the distance of a koss, within the distance of one koss, —-j 
or a koss and a half, from Underee or one koss and a half, from 
on this side. Underee this way. 

Article XI. 

Bajeerow’s fleet shall, by no Our fleet will, by no means, 
means, hurt or molest the fishing molejst any of the fishing galli- 
gallivats, or other vessels belong- vats or other vessels belonging 
ing to the English or their sub- to Bombay navigating these 
jects, in their navigation of these seas. In like manner, our fish- 
seas. In like manner, Bajeerow’s ing gallivats, and other vessels 
fishing gallivats, and other vessels of our jurisdiction, shall not be 
belonging to him or subjects of his molested by the English fleet. 

State, shall not be hurt or molested 
by the English fleet. 

Article XII. 

Bajeerow’s fleet shall pass and The fleet of this State shall go 
repass freely by the bar, or in the in and out of port freely, and if, 
river, at the mouth of the harbour ; at any time, it should repair to 
and in case of touching at Bom- Bombay for watering, and stay 
bay for watering, they shall have some time there, it shall meet 
friendly treatment. In like man- with assistance there. In like 
ner, the English fleet shall have manner, we will assist and supply 
reception and assistance in the the English fleet arriving at any 
ports of Bajeerow’s jurisdiction. of our ports. 

Article XIII. 

The English will give no let or There shall be no impediment 
molestation to the merchant vessels on the part of the English to 
laden with goods of the merchants our own merchant vessels, laden 
under Bajeerow’s jurisdiction, pass- with goods belonging to the 
ing to and from the Ilivers Negotan, merchants of our jurisdiction, and 
Penn, and other ports : but in case that go or come from sea into the 
of any of the said vessels importing Rivers Negotan, Penn, and other 
at Bombay, and landing their effects, ports ; but if any such vessels go 
they shall pay the port duties. into Bombay, and unload their 



TREATIES* ENGAGEMENTS, AND STJNNT3DS. 

goods, they shall pay iho cus¬ 
toms* However, in the river, 
there shall no harm whatever 
be suffered to be done to such 
merchant vessels by any power 
whatever. 


Article 

The merchant vessels belonging to 
the English and their subjects shall 
have free leave to purchase in the 
Kivers Negotan, Penn, and other 
places, provisions and all sorts of 
merchandize, and export the same, 
paying the customs, and on the 
part of Bajeerow there shall be no 
impediment. 

These fourteen Articles shall be 
observed without failure. 


XIV. 

The merchant vessels of 
Bombay may, in the rivers of 
Penn, Negotan, or other what¬ 
ever, purchase freely provisions, 
or other sorts of goods, and ex¬ 
port them, paying the customary 
duties ; and, on the part of this 
State, no impediment shall be 
given them. 

These fourteen Articles, I 
(Chimnajee) have consented to, 
and they shall be observed with¬ 
out failure. Let this be made 
manifest. 


The 16th of Rabillicar (or 12 th July). 

Confirmed by the Bombay Government on 20th July 1739. 


No. II. 

Articles of Agreement for an expedition against Toolajee Angria, settled in March 
1755, by the Hon’ble Richard Bourchier, Esquire, Governor of Bombay, in 
behalf of the Honorable East India Company; and Ramajee Punt, Soobadar, in 
behalf of his master, Nana (Balajee Bajee Rao) Pundit Pubdan, General of 
the Mahrattas. 

Is?.—That all the Marine shall be immediately under the command 
of the English, and the management of all affairs, both by sea and 
land, carried on by the approbation of both parties. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


17 


2nd .—All vessels whatever that may be taken from Toolajee pE j 
( Angria) shall be equally divided between the English and Mahrattas, g 
except the Restoration, which is to be the sole property of the English. 

3 rd .—Bankote and Himmutgur, with the river belonging thereto, 
and with five villages to the southward of said river, to be delivered 
to the English as the Honorable Company’s property for ever, and the 
Mahrattas not to levy any additional inland duties. 

4 th .—The English engage to keep the sea, and prevent Angria’s 
fleet from throwing succours into any place that may be attacked, 
but at this season only Soovurndoorg, Unjunwel, and Yijidoorg. 

5th .—All ammunition, guns, and other stores that may be taken 
in the several forts in Angria’s territories to belong entirely to the 
Mahrattas. 

6th .—If Manajee’s territories are jointly attacked, the Fort of Khan- 
deree with* its harbour to be delivered unto the Honorable Company, 
with the Villages Rivans, Runjunkhar, Sarul Shamy, Mandven, 
Ivolgaon, Donbaren, Kehim, and Avas. 

7th .—Any other Articles that may be necessary to be agreed upon 
to be settled between the Governor and Nana Pundit Purdan. 

Confirmed by the Government of Bombay on the 19th March 1755. 


No. III. 

Tkjuvty with tho Mahrattas, dated the 12th of October 17J(b 

Article I. 

That the Mahratta Government will never permit the Dutch to 
settle or come into their dominions, but, on the contrary, issue express 
orders to prevent their carrying on any trade therein. 

Article II. 

As an Article regarding Maliim River was included in the Treaty 
made in the time of the deceased Bajeerow, and it having been repre¬ 
sented that the Bundora coolies have of late begun to set up new fishing 
stakes, which they ought not to have done in that river, the Mahratta 
Government do hereby oblige themselves not to permit thereof in future. 

VOL. HI. C 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


18 ' 


s Article III. 

WA. 

II. As Bankote and Himmutgur have been delivered to the Honorable 
Company, the Mahrattas do, by these presents, give them the follow¬ 
ing villages towards defraying the expenses thereof, and which are to 
remain the said Honorable Company’s property for ever, and of which 
they are to be put in possession without further delay, viz., Vilass, 
Bag, Manly, Veswee, Chepolee, Coodook, Pundaree, Panam, Dasgom, 
and Comela. 


Article IV. 

It having been a custom, during the Governments of Angria and 
the Mahrattas at Bankote, that the Seeddees received a chouth, or quar¬ 
ter part of the customs, the Mahrattas engage to satisfy the Seeddce 
in this particular, and that the Honorable Company do not meet with 
any embarrassment concerningit, nor concerning the royalty of this 
river, which is hereby given and made over to them for ever. In case 
the Seeddee should dispute complying with the foregoing, the English 
declare it should not retard the compliance with what may be mention¬ 
ed in these Articles concerning the delivery of Ghereah. 

Article V. 

Customs are to be levied by the Mahrattas on goods which pass up 
the river of Bankote only at Gorgom and Marr, and not any let or 
impediment in any of the intervening places in the said river of 
Bankote. 

Article YI. 

As Dasgom is a pass for the Vunjarrahs, or country merchants, the 
Mahrattas engage that such goods as are carried that way to Marr, 
either by the river or by land, shall not pay any duties there, but only 
the usual nickolla. 

Article VII. 

All such subjects and inhabitants of Bankote, Himmutgur, and its 
dependencies, as, on account of the dispute with Angria, retired to 
the Mahratta territories, shall, if they are content so to do, be allowed 
to return to the English without any impediment from the Mahratta 
Government; and others that in future may leave the English arc 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


19 


to be permitted to return again, if agreeable to them, in the manner 
above mentioned: and such subjects as shall leave the Mahratta' 
Government and retire to Bankote shall have liberty to return to 
the Mahrattas again on their agreeing with them, and in such case 
the English will not impede them. 

Article VIII. 

The Mahrattas may export from the river of Bankote, annually, for 
the use of their southern forts, &c., grain of all kinds, to the value 
of forty thousand (40,000) Rupees, and it shall be free from customs 
at Bankote. They shall also have liberty to export, custom free, such 
salt, rafters, small timbers, &c., as they may want for the use of their 
Sircar or Government: and in consideration thereof the Honorable Com¬ 
pany’s goods, to the amount of one hundred and fifty thousand (150,000) 
Rupees, sli£ll annually, in like manner, be free from all customs as far 
as Poona, upon Dakhlas, or certificates, being produced on both sides. 

Article IX. 

No additional inland duties whatever to be levied on the English 
goods by the Mahratta Government, but only the Rahadaree Customs. 

Article X. 

Junardow Buttol Phudness Mahagom, with Ballajee Bajeerow, 
Pundit Purdan, has a patrimony, in Velass, of one garden and fifteen 
beegalis of batty ground, which is to remain with him; in lieu or in 
consideration of which Nandgoa Compra is granted to the Honorable 
Company. 


Article XI. 

The Dutch goods will not be permitted to be landed atRajapore, nor 
their trade suffered to be carried on there, concerning which the Mah¬ 
rattas will give proper orders: and the people under the Mahratta 
Government are not to trade at Rajapore; but if disputes arise with 
the Seeddee, this is to be no obstacle to the delivery of Ghereah, as 
will be mentioned in a subsequent Article, 

Article XII. 

The Brahmins, inhabitants at Hurrasecar, and others that will pass 
to and from thence on pilgrimage, are to be free from paying.customs, 


t: 

PEIS 

No! 



20 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


in regard to the necessaries that they may have for their own 
x£ use, or to perform their ceremonies; but this does not extend to 
merchandize. 


Article XIII. 

The Mahar Government to carry grain of all kinds, timber, wood, 
&c., according to the custom formerly observed, but as to the power of 
the river, it is to be carried on agreeable to the Articles of this Treaty. 

Article XIV. 

The Fort of Eswant Gur is to be entirely demolished, and the 
English, on their parts, are not to make any forts or fortifications 
within the nine villages, nor by the river. In like manner, the Mah- 
ratta Government are not to make any by the river of Bankote, or in 
the villages belonging to them. This Article, however, "is not to 
exempt the English from building such houses and warehouses as they 
think proper in the villages belonging to them. 

Article XY. 

As all the royalty of Bankote and Himmutgur is with the English, 
they are to take care, as much as in their power lies, to prevent the 
enemy prejudicing the Mahrattas through that river. 

Article XVI. 

Ghereah Fort to be delivered within twenty-four days after the 
departure of the English gentlemen from Poona, together with such 
guns, balls, stores, &c., either of the fort or fleet, that the captors 
left for the service of the garrison or otherwise, or did not them¬ 
selves sell; but the stores, ammunition, &c., that properly belong 
to the Honorable Company, they are to carry away with them. The 
officers of Toolajee are to go where they please; and if his family 
(wife and children) should be desirous of returning to him, the 
English will not impede it, but grant them free liberty so to do : 
and the Mahratta Government engages that Toolajee Angria shall 
have no place given him nor any power below the Ghaut. Balajee 
Bajeerow Pundit Purdan is to send an officer of credit with the 
English gentleman, who is to proceed with one of the Council 
from Bombay to Ghereah, which person, belonging to the Mahratta 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AN I) SUNNUDS, 


21 


Government, is to have in his possession the proper Sunnuds and p EJ 
orders regarding the delivery of Bankote and its villages; and when —« 
the Mahratta people and colours are got into Ghereah, and the English 
ready to go out, he is to deliver directly the said Sunnuds and orders, 
for Port Victoria ( or Bankote) and its several villages, to the English 
Councillor, and then return with that gentleman to Bankote directly 
to see Nana’s orders are effectually executed in regard to the villages. 

Article XVII. 

These Articles being concluded and agreed upon by both parties, 
they are to act conformable thereto, in consequence of which all dis¬ 
putes are to subside, and no claims are to be made by the Mahratta 
Government on the Honorable Company to the date of these presents. 

„ . . Article XVIII. 

All Treaties hitherto made between the Mahratta Government and 
English are to be observed and maintained inviolable by both parties 
agreeable to the tenor of them. 

The foregoing Articles being agreed to by us, and accepted of by 
us, we do, in confirmation thereof, affix to these presents the seal of 
the Honorable United English East India Company, and do attest 
the same with our own proper names in Poona, the day and year 
above written. 

(Signed) Thomas Byfj:lt>. 

„ John Spencer. 



22 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

No. IV. 

Articles of Agreement made with Seuram Punt Tatiah, in behalf’ of Madarao 
Badajee, son of Balajee Bajeerow, Pundit Punt Purdan, dated the I4th of 
September 1761. 


Article I. 

That such of the Mahratta officers who have presumed to stop any 
Pattamars, and obstructed the business of the English by any impe¬ 
diments whatever, shall be severely punished for such their offences; 
and to prevent the like happening again in future, strict orders shall 
be issued immediately for that purpose, which if not found sufficient 
to answer that end, the English are to acquaint Madarao thereof; and 
if redress is not obtained in reasonable time, if the English then take 
satisfaction of such offenders, in whatever manner may by them be 
thought proper, it is not to be deemed a breach of friendship between 
the two Governments. 


Article II. 

That ample satisfaction shall be made, within two months from 
the date hereof, to all merchants trading under the Honorable Com¬ 
pany’s protection, who have suffered in their property by any unjust 
or illegal actions of the Mahratta officers or subjects, in any place, shape, 
or maimer whatever, and rigid orders issued that all assistance he 
afforded in future to any vessel or vessels in distress, having English 
colours or passes, without subjecting the owners or proprietors thereof 
to any impediments under the pretence of their being wrecks from 
the splitting of a sail, the breaking of their masts or yards, and such 
trifling misfortunes; whereas no vessels are to be deemed wrecks but 
such as are driven ashore, and there break to pieces by stress of woather, 
when the Mahratta officer and the people of the vessels are to join in 
saving all that is possible, which must be lodged in secure warehouses, 
and then one-half of what is so saved shall belong to Madarao and 
the other half to the owners. 

Article III. 

That all Europeans and Natives, either soldiers, seamen, or others, 
in His Britannic Majesty’s or the Honorable Company’s pay, who may 
hereafter desert from Bombay, shall be immediately secured, and 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


23 


returned to the nearest English Settlement to such place where they J 
may be apprehended upon landing in any part of the Mahratta country, — 
the Governor having promised all such a free pardon and to pay any 
reasonable charges that may be incurred on the occasion. In like 
manner shall be delivered up all deserters, in the English pay, from 
Surat, on their being known, or immediately on receiving notice of 
them, within the Mahratta limits, it not being in their power to speak 
more positively with respect to those of Surat, as the country there¬ 
abouts is open and numbers go through it without being known. It 
is also agreed that whatever people, Europeans of all nations except¬ 
ed, who are in the service of Madarao and may desert therefrom 
to the English, shall be delivered up on the same terms and 
conditions. 


~ # Article IV. 

That proper people shall be forthwith despatched for restoring the 
whole jurisdiction and territories of Rajapore to the Seeddees of 
Junjerah in the same condition and manner as they remained before 
invaded and attacked by Ramajee Punt, which country is not 
to be molested in future by any of the Mahratta officers or 
subjects. 

Article V. 

That all prisoners taken by the Mahrattas or Seeddees, subjects of 
either Government and now in their possession, shall be sent to Bom¬ 
bay within one month from the signing of these Articles, and mutually 
restored by the Governor to their freedom, and all hostilities between 
the Mahrattas and Seeddees shall cease from this time. 

Lastly, that proper orders shall be instantly despatched to all the 
Mahratta officers, requiring them to show a due obedience to these 
Articles, which are to be confirmed under Madarao's seal, and trans¬ 
mitted to Bombay with all possible expedition after the signing and 
sealing thereof; when a counterpart of the same is to be executed by 
the Governor and transmitted to Poona. 

In confirmation of all which I, Govind Seuram Punt Tatiah, have 
to this instrument interchangeably set my hand and seal (in behalf of 
Madarao Balajee Pundit aforesaid) at Bombay, the 14th of September 
1761. 



24 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


An additional Article. 

As to what relates to the restoration of Underee Fort and the 
country appertaining thereto, is submitted to Madarao s generosity, in 
full expectation that he will deliver them likewise, or assign over, in 
lieu thereof, such lands belonging to him as will prove an equivalent 
thereto. The same day and year above written. 


No. V. 


Treaty with Ragoba, 1775. 


Seal of 
the 
Company. 


Articles of Agreement and Treaty between the Honorable William Hornby, Esq., 
President and Governor, &c., Council of Bombay, and of all its dependencies, on 
the part and behalf of the Honorable United English East India Company on the one 
part, and Ragonath Kao Ballajee, Peishwa, on the other part. Dated the 6th day 
of March, in the year of our Lord 1775, or the third day of the month Mohurrum 
and year 1189 (Hegira), Mahomedan style, or the day of the month 

and year 1179, Gentoo style. 


Article I. 

The Treaty concluded between the Government of Bombay and 
Bajeerow Pundit Purdan, or first Minister of His Serene Highness 
the Sou Bajah, dated July 1739, or 1140 of the Gentoo style ; and 
that concluded on the part of this Government with Ballajee Bajeerow 
Purdan, dated 12th October 1756, or of the Mahomedan style 17th 
of Mohurrum 1170, are hereby ratified and confirmed in their fullest 
extent, according to the full and true intent and meaning of them, 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


25 


in the same full and ample manner, and in the same light in which 
they have hitherto been ever understood. 

Article II. 

All other Agreements subsisting between the Government of Botnbay 
and that of the Mahrattas, are hereby ratified and confirmed; and, 
after the re-establishment of Ragoba in the Government of the 
Mahratfca dominions, peace and tranquillity shall subsist between this 
Government in behalf of the Honorable Company and the Mahratta 
Government. 


Article III. 

Ragoba, on his part and on the part of the Mahratta Government, 
engages from this day forward never, on any pretence or in any 
manner, Id assist the enemies of the Honorable Company in any 
part whatever of their dominions in India, and the .Honorable the 
Governor in Council of Bombay do, in the like manner, engage never 
to assist the enemies of Ragoba. 


Article IV. 

The Honorable the President and Council of Bombay, in behalf of the 
Honorable Company, and in consideration of the undermentioned grants 
and cessions made by Ragoba to the Company, do hereby engage 
and agree, so soon as possible after these Articles of Agreement and 
Treaty are fully ratified, executed, and confirmed, on the part of 
Ragoba, to assist him with a strong body of forces, with proper guns 
and warlike stores as a -field train of artillery, which are to join his 
army and act in conjunction with his forces against his enemies, 
the ministerial party. In the said body of forces shall be included no 
less than seven hundred (700) Europeans ; and the whole shall not be 
less in number than two thousand five hundred men: but at present 
only five hundred (500) Europeans, and one thousand (1,000) 
sepoys and lascars, with a proper and effectual number of guns, 
will be sent, and the rest, if wanted, afterwards. 

Article V. 

In consideration of such effectual assistance on the part of the Honor¬ 
able Company, Ragoba, as Peishwa and as Supreme Governor in the 

VOL. III. D 



26 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E whole Mahratta Empire, doth hereby engage, on his part, to cede and 
—~ make over to the Honorable Company, for ever, the undermentioned 
places and territories; and he doth accordingly, by these presents, make 
over the same to them in the most full, ample, and effectual manner: 
and he doth, with these presents, deliver the necessary Sunnuds, grant¬ 
ing, in the fullest manner, all the present and future full right and title 
of the Mahratta Government to them ; and, in case of the loss at any 
time of the Sunnuds now delivered, these presents are, at all times, 
to be considered as such, and of full equal validity with any Sunnud 
whatever. 

Bassein and the whole of its dependencies in its fullest extent, and 
all rents and revenues thereunto belonging, together with the fort or 
forts and everything belonging to the Poona Government in them. 

Salsette, the whole and entire island, with all the revenues of the 
different places annexed to it as collected by Anunt Row and Ramajee 
Punt. 

Jambooseer and Orpad, with the whole of their dependencies in 
their full extent, together with everything belonging to the Poona 
Government in those Pergunnahs. 

The four following islands adjacent to Bombay, with everything 
belonging to the Poona Government therein, viz., Caranja, Canary, 
Elephanta, and Hog Island. 


Article VI. 

Ragoba also engages immediately to procure from the Guicowars 
a grant to the Company for ever, with all the necessary Sunnuds, of 
their share in the revenues collected by the ■ Guicowars in the Town 
and Pergunnahs of Broach. 


Article VII. 

The Honorable Company are to be considered as the sole lords 
and proprietors, from the day of the signing of this Treaty, of all and 
every of the places ceded by the two last Articles, in the like manner 
as the Poona Government or the. Guicowar Government were 
before considered; and are accordingly, from this day forward, to 
exercise every right and authority in those places, and to receive 
every revenue which the Poona Government or the Guicowar 
Government before exercised or received. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUD& 27 

Article VIII. 

Ragoba also engages faithfully *to make good to .the Company tor 
ever the sum of seventy-five thousand (75,000) Rupees annually from 
his share of the revenues of Occlascer, which sum is to be paid by 
his Pundit, in two different payments, at stated periods. 

Article IX. 

Ragoba engages to pay in full, for the charges and expenses of 
the body of forces with which he is to be assisted, consisting of two 
thousand five hundred men, the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand 
Rupees (150,000) monthly and every month, which the Honorable the 
Governor and Council agree to accept without further account, and is 
to commence the day the forces leave Bombay; but, as the whole 
number of forces will not at first proceed, he is only to pay a propor¬ 
tionable monthly sum, till the whole force, if necessary, may be 
sent to join him. He engages to pay this stipend monthly, and as 
security for the same, till his affairs will enable him to furnish money, 
which he promises to do as soon as possible, he assigns by these 
presents the revenues of the following places, viz .— 

Occlaseei', his remaining share after deducting what is before by 
these presents ceded to the Honorable Company. 

Ahmood and all its districts. 

Hansoot and all its districts. 

Versaul and all its districts. 

But it is hereby declared that the revenues of these places belong 
to the Honorable Company no longer than till the amount of the 
monthly stipend that may be due for the expenses of the Com¬ 
pany’s forces is fully discharged, when all further demands on these 
four places are to be relinquished; and in this light the Honor¬ 
able the Governor and Council declare they accept those four 
Pergunnahs, 


Article X. 

As it has been mutually agreed, during the course of this negocia- 
tion, that the sum of six lakhs of Rupees should be deposited by 
Ragoba with the Agents of the Honorable Company, to be accounted 
for at the expiration of the service intended to be performed against 
his enemies the ministerial party, and Ragoba, finding it at this 



28 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

time totally impossible for him to raise the sum to be deposited, though 
still equally willing to do it, was it in his power, the contracting par¬ 
ties have mutually agreed to settle this point as follows :—That Rago- 
bft shall immediately deposit with the Company’s Agents at Surat 
to the full value of six lakhs of Rupees, in jewels, to remain in 
the Honorable Company’s possession till redeemed, which must be 
done as soon as Ragoba’s affairs will possibly admit. All this Ragoba 
faithfully and firmly* engages to perform and the Honorable Com¬ 
pany to accept* 

Article XI. 

In case of opposition from any person or persons whatever to the 
Company’s taking possession of all or any of the places hereby firmly 
and effectually ceded to them, Ragoba doth engage to pay the ex¬ 
pense that will be incurred by their gaining possession; to*use effec¬ 
tual means to put them in possession; as well as to seeing for them 
for ever the quiet possession of all the revenues and places now 
ceded to the Honorable Company. 

Article XII. 

Should Ragoba make peace with his enemies, the Ministers, he 
firmly and faithfully engages that the English East India Company 
shall be included in it to their satisfaction. 

Article XIII. 

Kagoba doth also engage never to molest the dominions of the 
Honorable Company in Bengal. He further engages not to make 
war or commit any depredations in the Carnatic so long as the last 
Treaty subsisting between the two Governments is adhered to by 
the Nabob. 


Article XIV. 

In case it should happen (which God forbid) that any of the Com¬ 
pany’s ships or vessels, or the ships, vessels, or boats of any persons 
trading under their protection, should be shipwrecked on any part of 
the Mahratta coast, every assistance shall be given by the Govern¬ 
ment and inhabitants to save as much as possible ; and the whole 
that may be saved shall be returned, all reasonable expenses being 
paid by the owners. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


29 


Article XV. 

All the places ceded for ever to the Company by this Treaty are to 
be considered as their sole right and property from the day this 
Treaty is signed; and this Treaty from that day is to be considered 
m full force just as if the expected services were fully accomplished, 
whether Eagoba shall make peace with his enemies or not. 

Article XYl. 

Immediately after the ratification of the aforegoing Articles, and 
after the jewels, to the full amount of six lakhs of Eupees, are 
deposited, and the security above-mentioned given for the payment 
of the monthly expenses of the forces so long as they continue with 
Eagoba and till they return, all in the manner above-mentioned, 
the Governor and the Council engage that the Company’s forces, 
agreeable to what is mentioned in the body of this Treaty, shall 
proceed from Bombay to join the army of Eagoba, and they trust, 
by the blessing of the Almighty, that they will quickly overcome 
his enemies, the ministerial party, and establish him at Poona in 
the Government of the Mahratta Empire. 

The foregoing Articles having been agreed to by the Honorable 
the President and Council of Bombay, who have empowered me to 
accept the same in their behalf, I do, in confirmation thereof, affix 
the seal of the said Honorable Company, and sign my own proper name 
thereto, in Surat, the day and year above written, and I do engage to 
procure a ratification of this Treaty, under the seal of the Honor%ble 
Company, and under the hands and seals of the Honorable the Presi¬ 
dent and Council of Bombay, within thirty days after this date. 

(Signed) Bobert Gambier. 


We, the President and Council of Bombay aforesaid, having em^ 
powered Mr. Eobert Gambier to execute a Treaty with Eugonath 
Eow Ballajee, Peishwa, in our behalf, on account of the Honorable 
Company, of the foregoing tenor, which he has accordingly done of 
the date above-mentioned, and the same having been signed to, 
ratified, and confirmed by Eugonath Eow Ballajee, Peishwa; and 
whereas, by the last Article, it is covenanted and agreed that 



30 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


a ratification of the said Treaty shall be transmitted by us* under 
the seal of the Honorable Company* and under our proper hands 
and seals* within one month from the above date; these* therefore* 
are to certify that we hereby ratify and confirm the foregoing 
Treaty in all and every part. In testimony whereof we have caus¬ 
ed the seal of the aforesaid Honorable Company to be hereunto 
affixed, and do now sign the same with our hands* and affix our 
proper seals thereto* this 16th day of March* in the year of our 
Lord 1775. 


(Signed) 


William Hornby. 


jj 


Daniel Draper. 





Thomas Mostyn. 


L. S. 


V 


y> 


Brice Fletcher. 



yy 


William Tayler. 



By order of the Honorable William Hornby* Esq.* President and 
Governor* &c.* Council of His Majesty’s Castle and Island of Bombay* 
and of all forts* factories* territories* forces* and affairs of the 
Honorable English East India Company on the west side of India 
and on the coast of Persia and Arabia. 

(Signed) George Skipp* 

Secretary. 




TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


31 


List of Sunnuds for the undermentioned places given by Ragoba 
Bajeerow Purdan to the Honorable Company :— 


2 Sunnuds for 



... Bassein, 

2 ditto ** 



... Salsctte. 

1 ditto ** 



... Orpad. 

1 ditto „ 



... Jambooseer. 

1 ditto ,, 


• ** 

... Broach. 

1 ditto ,* 



... Caranja. 

1 ditto „ 


It* 

... Elephanta. 

1 ditto „ 



Canary. 

1 ditto ,, 



... Balsar. 

2 ditto ** 



,.. Occlaseer. 

1 ditto „ 



... Hansoot. 

2 ditto ** 



... Ahmood. 

16 Sunnuds. 





Translate of Jive Sunnuds from Ragoba, for Bassein, Salsctte, Or pad, 
Jambooseer , and Broach, all included under No, 1. 

TO THE DESSMOCK AND DeSFANDY* OR TO THE PUNDIT AND 
Omaldars UNDER HIM. 

I, Ragoba Bajeerow Purdan* having sent for a force from the Com¬ 
pany for my assistance* in consequence of which I have discharged 
the former Government from the said Pergunnahs* and delivered the 
said Government to the English Company; therefore* you are hereby 
ordered to pay great submission and obedience* and give over the 
charge to the English Company. 

Dated Zil-hitch the 111 th, 1165. 


Translate ofJive Sunnuds from Ragoba, for Bassein, Sakette , Caranja * 
Elephant a, and Canary , all included under No, 2. 

To TIIE HaVILDAR AND ALL MANAGERS OF BUSINESS: 

Ragoba Bajeerow Purdan, his compliments, acquainting them that 
the Castles of all these places have been given to the Company; you 















32 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E 

WA. 

V. 


are, therefore, to deliver them the charge thereof and obtain a receipt 
for them. 

Dated the ll£A Zil-hitch , 1165. 


Translate of four Sunnuds from Ragoba , for Occlaseer , Hansoofy 
Balsar , and Ahmood, all included under No. 3. 

To the Government or Omaldars. 

After complimentsy 

That I, Ragoba Bajeerow Purdan, for and in consideration of the 
forces the Company have given me for my assistance, have agreed to 
pay them the sum of 1,50,000 Rupees every month; therefore you 
are to pay them the revenues of your place and take the receipt for 
what you pay them; and the same is to continue till their demand 
is discharged. 

Dated the lU/i Zil-hitch, 1165. 


Translate of a Sunnud from Ragoba for Occlaseer , included 

under No. 4. 

To the Government or Pundit of Occlaseer. 

After compliments, 

That Ragoba Bajeerow do command you to pay, out of the revenues 
of your place, the sum of 75,000 Rupees to the English Company 
annually, which is for the assistance they have given me. 

Dated the 11th Zil-hitch, 1165. 


Translate of a Sunnud from Ragoba for Ahmood, included 
under No. 5. 

To the Zemindar or Landholder of Ahmood. 

That I, Ragoba Bajeerow Purdan, do command you to pay the 
revenues of your place to the English Company, being on account of 
my Agreement to pay them monthly for the assistance they have given 
me, which is to continue till the whole of their demand is paid ; and 
till which time your place will be as if it was mortgaged to them. 

Dated the lltfA Zil-hitch , 1165, 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


33 


No. VI. 

PEI 

Treaty between the Honorable the English East India Company and the N< 
Mahratta State, 1776. 

Poorundah , 1^ day of March 1776. 

Whereas differences have arisen amongst the Chiefs of the Mahratta 
State, and the Government of Bombay having taken a part therein by 
sending forces into the Mahratta dominions, which the Honorable 
the Governor-General and Council of Fort William disapprove, and 
being desirous of conciliating these differences, have determined ac¬ 
cordingly to enter into such measures as may most effectually con¬ 
tribute to so desirable an end: They have for this purpose, therefore, 
authorized, deputed, and given full powers unto Lieutenant-Colonel 
John Upton, in the service of the Honorable the English East India 
Company, conclude a peace between the Government of Bombay 
and the Mahratta State. And Colonel Upton, having accordingly 
arrived at Poorunder, has concluded a solid and firm peace, on the 
part of the English Company, with the Ministers, Siccaram Pundit 
and Ballajee Pundit, on the part of the Peishwa Row Pundit Purdhan 
and all the Mahratta Chiefs; and the following are the Articles of 
Convention which they have engaged into:— 

Article I. 

Peace shall be established and take place from this day between the 
Honorable the English East India Company in general and the 
Government of Bombay in particular, and Row Pundit Purdhan and 
his Ministers, Siccaram Bapoo and Ballajee Pundit, on the part of all 
the Mahrattas: and the following Articles are to be observed inviolably 
by both parties :— 


Article II. 

The peace is to be forthwith proclaimed between the Honorable 
Company and the Mahratta State, at the Presidency of Bombay 
and at all its dependencies, at the head of the English troops 
encamped at Mandavie, and in every part of the Guzerat Province 
where there are British subjects. The Mahratta Government will also 
order proclamations to be made throughout all their dominions. 
vol. hi. 


E 



E 

WA. 


VI. 


34 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

Article III. 

The Peishwa, Row Pundit Purdhan, and his Ministers being desir¬ 
ous of having Salsette and the small islands subdued by the English 
in this war restored to them, do offer to give in exchange a country 
of three laldis of Rupees, with its chout, &c., in the neighbourhood of 
Broach. Colonel Upton having declared that he could not restore the 
said islands, it is therefore agreed that they shall remain as they now 
are, and that they shall write to the Honorable the Supreme Council 
of Fort William, and both parties engage to abide by their determina¬ 
tion. If the Governor-General and Council of Fort William do not 
restore them, they shall continue in the possession of the English, and 
the Mahrattas will then give up all right and title to the said islands; 
should the Governor-General and Council of Calcutta restore Salsette 
with the said islands, the English will accordingly delive^them over 
to the Peiskwa. 


Article IV. 

The Mahrattas do agree to give to the English Company for ever 
all right and title to their entire share of the City and Pergunnah of 
Broach, as full and complete as ever they collected from the Moguls, 
or otherwise, without retaining claim of chout, or any other demand 
whatever; so that the English Company shall possess it without 
participation or claim of any kind. 

Article V. 

The Mahrattas do agree (by way of friendship) to give for ever to 
the English Company a country of three complete lakhs of Rupees, 
near or adjoining to Broach, on which there is to be no claim of 
chout, or any other demand whatsoever. Two persons on the part of 
the Company and two persons on the part of Row Pundit Purdlian 
to proceed and determine the place and boundaries, when the Peishwa 
will give the Sunnuds. 

Article VI. 

The Peishwa and Ministers agree to pay to the Company twelve 
lakhs of Rupees, in pai't of the expenses of the English army, in two 
payments, viz., six lakhs within six months of the date of this Treaty, 
and the other six lakhs within two years of the same date. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


35 


T 

Article VII. PEIg 

The English do agree that every part of the Guzerat country No 
ceded to the Company by Rugonath Row, or taken possession of by 
them, shall be forthwith restored with all the forts and towns there¬ 
unto belonging, except what is settled by this Treaty. The country 
ceded to the English by Seajee, or Fut-ty Sing Guicowar, shall also 
be restored when it is proved by their letters and copies of the Sun- 
uuds granted by the former Peishwas, now in their (the Guicowar’s) 
hands, that they do not possess power or authority to make such 
cessions. The Pergunnahs of Chickley and Coral, with the town of 
Veriow, three villages of the Pergunnah of Chureass}*, and the vil¬ 
lage of Batta Gang are to continue as pledges in the possession of 
the English till the Sunnuds for the country of three lakhs are made 
over. AlFTreaties and Agreements subsisting between the English and 
Rugonath Row are hereby annulled; and those of' Seajee and Futty 
Sing, Guicowars, are to be also annulled when the above-mentioned 
proofs are produced; and these Treaties are to be destroyed in the 
presence of the Peishwa’s Ministers when they come to hand. 

Article VIII. 

The English do agree that the troops from the Presidency of 
Bombay are to be marched immediately into their own garrisons 
and districts. 


Article IX. - 

It is agreed that Rugonath Row is to disband his army within 
one month of this date. His followers and adherents (except the 
servants about his person) are to separate within the same time; and 
proclamation is to be made by the Mahratta Government, granting 
a full pardon to all adherents and followers, and all such as have 
been in arms with Rugonath Row, the four following excepted, viz 
Abajee Mahadu, Xoor Cawn Gardie, Toola Khidmutgar, andKurrun 
Sing Chokydar, who, for crimes and misdemeanors committed against 
the State, are for ever banished the Mahratta dominions. 

Article X. 

If Rugonath Row refuses to disband his army, the English are to 
withdraw their forces, and are not to assist him. 



36 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


THE 

E1SHWA. 
"No. VI. 


Article XI. 

The conditions of the ninth Article being complied with, the 
Peishwa and Ministers then consent to establish a household for Rugo- 
nath Row, consisting of one thousand horse and some foot, who 
are to be paid and relieved at the pleasure of Government, but to 
obey all legal orders given them by Rugonath Row ; also two hundred 
domestics, to be chosen by Rugonath Row and paid by Government. 
They will also cause to be paid to Rugonath Row, to defray his other 
expenses, three lakhs of Rupees per annum, by monthly payments, 
at the rate of twenty-five thousand Rupees per month, conditionally 
that he resides at Cooper Gang, on the banks of the Gunga Guda- 
very. If at any time he may want to change his place of residence, 
•application is to be made to the Peishwa, without whose permission 
such a change is not to take place; and he is not to cause any disturb¬ 
ance or carry on improper correspondence with any person. 

Article XII. 

It is agreed that no assistance is to be given by the English to 
Rugonath Row, or to any subject or servant of the Peishwa that 
shall cause disturbances or rebellion in the Mahratta dominions. 

Article XIII. 

The Peishwa, Row Pundit Purdhan, and his Ministers, do declare 
that the chout of Bengal and its dependencies has, for time out of mind, 
been part of the jaghire of the Bounsello; they therefore cannot 
withdraw it; but if the said Bounsello, or any of his descendants, 
or successors, or any other person, cause disturbances by claiming or 
demanding the chout on Bengal or its dependencies, they do engage 
never to assist them themselves, or permit any Mahratta Chief 
dependent on them or the Rajahship to give them any assistance. 

Article XIV. 

It is agreed that, in case of shipwreck of any English ships or vessels, 
or ships or vessels trading under their protection, on any part of 
the Mahratta coast, every assistance shall be given by that Govern¬ 
ment and the inhabitants to save as much as possible; and the whole 
that may be saved shall be returned, all reasonable charges being 
defrayed by the owners. In like manner, the English Company 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


37 


engage tlieir assistance should any Mahratta ships or vessels be 
shipwrecked on any of their coasts. 

Article XV. 

The Treaties between the Government of Bombay and the Mahrat- 
tas, dated July 1739 and 12th October 1756, are to be held and 
continued in as full force as when they were first entered into ; 
unless any Article or Articles of either of them should, in other 
manner, be provided for by this Treaty ; in such case such Article or 
Articles are to be rejected, and those of this Treaty abided by. 

Article XVI. 

All other Treaties or Agreements subsisting between the Govern¬ 
ment of Bombay and the Mahratta Government, not having under¬ 
gone alteration or otherwise provided for by this Treaty, are to be 
held and continued in as full force as when they were first entered 
upon. 


Article XVII. 

It is agreed that, if Rugonath Row has lodged any jewels belonging 
to the Peishwa, Row Pundit Purdhan, in the hands of the English, 
they are to be restored on the obligation being complied with for 
which they were lodged. 

Article XVIII. 

The Honorable the English Company shall be considered as the sole 
lords and proprietors of all the places ceded by this Treaty from the 
dates of the respective Sunnuds or Grants, and are therein, accord¬ 
ingly, to exercise their own laws and authorities. And the Makrattas 
are not to cause any disturbance in any of the ceded countries, nor 
shall the English occasion any disturbance in the Mahratta dominions. 

Article XIX. 

In the places hereby ceded to the Honorable Company, and in all the 
places restored to the Mahratta Government by the English, it is 
agreed that both parties shall commence to collect the revenues 
thereof from the day on which they are delivered, and no demand of 
collection for any past time shall be made. 



38 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E 

lWa. 


VI. 


Article XX. 

A copy of this Treaty, under the seal of Colonel Upton, shall remain 
with the Ministers of the Mahratta Government, and a copy shall he 
sent to Calcutta, to be signed and sealed by the Honorable the 
Governor-General and Members of the Supreme Council of Fort 
William, and afterwards given to the Peishwa. 

(Signed) J. Upton. 


(A translation.) 

(Signed) Ar. M’Pherson, 

Persian Interpreter. 

The signature of Ballajee Pundit. 

The signature of Siccaram Pundit. 

(Here .it is dated.) 


Received the following letter from Colonel Upton. 

Gentlemen,— It lias been agreed between the Governor-General 
and the Peishwa, and his Ministers, that the following alterations and 
clause should be made in the Treaty. This has been accordingly 
done, and the Treaty finally signed and made over by both parties. 

I have the honor to be. 

Gentlemen, with respect, 

Xour most obedient, humble servant, 

(Signed) J. Upton. 

Poortinder, ] 

26th May 1776. j 

The 13th and 17th Articles are omitted entirely ; the 14th Article 
therefore becomes the 13th, and so on, and the 18th Article becomes 
the 16th 3 and so on. 

The concluding words of the 7th Article, “ and these Treaties are to 
be destroyed in the presence of the Peishwa’s Ministers when they 
come to hand/’ are also omitted. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


39 


Additional Clause . 

* Whereas it is declared by the third Article of the foregoing Treaty 
that “ the Peishwa, Row Pundit Purdan, and his Ministers, being 
ee desirous of having Salsette and the small islands subdued by the 
English in the late war restored to them, do offer to give in 
exchange a country- of three lakhs of Rupees, with its chout, &c., in 
“ the neighbourhood of Broach and further that, “ if the Governor 
General and Council of Fort William do not restore them, they 
“ shall continue in the possession of the English, and the said Peishwa, 
“ Row Pundit Purdan, and his Ministers will then give up all right 
“ and title to the said islands.” The said Governor-General and Coun¬ 
cil hereby declare their intention and resolution not to relinquish the 
said islands of Salsette, Caranja, Elephanta, and Hog, or to accept 
the territory offered in exchange for those islands : and the said islands 
are accordingly to remain for ever in the possession of the English 
by virtue of the present Treaty. 

(Signed) J. Upton. 

POORUNDER, ) 

22nd Maij 1776. j 


No. VII. 

Treaty with Ragoba, 1778. 


Ragoba’s 

Sicca. 



(Signed) Edward Rayenscroft, 

Secretary to the Select Committee . 

Articles of Agreement and Treaty between the Honorable William Hornby, Esquire, 
President and Governor, and the Select Committee of Bombay, on the part and 
behalf of the Honorable United English East India Company on the one part, and 
Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan on the other part. Done and concluded at 


T1 

PEIS 

' no7 



40 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS, 


E 

WA. 

mT 


Bombay, tliis 24tli day of November, In the year of our Lord 1778, and on the 3rd 
day of Jeelend Sookhursun Tessah Subein Miah-wa-Alluff, or year 1179, Maho¬ 
metan style; or, according to the Gentoo era, the 5th day of Marguashur Sood, in 
the year Yellamly, or 1700. 


Article I. 

The Treaty concluded by Colonel Upton with Siccaram Pundit 
and Ballajee Pundit, Ministers in behalf of the Peishwa and the 
Mahratta State, having been violated by those Ministers in almost 
every Article, the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay, with 
the sanction and concurrence of the Governor-General and Council, 
do hereby engage and agree, in behalf of the aforesaid Honorable 
Company, to assist Eugonath Eow Bajeerow Purdan to the utmost 
of their power to put him in possession of Poona, and to place 
him in the Regency of the Mahratta Empire, during thq_ minority of 
Madarow Narrain, the infant Peishwa; hereby declaring that the 
true intent and meaning of this Treaty is not to alter the form of 
Government, or to interrupt the peace between the Plonorable 
Company and the Mahratta State, but only to remove the administra¬ 
tion out of the present improper hands, and to place in the Regency 
the person who has the justest title to that office. 

Article II. 

Eugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan, on his part, doth hereby engage 
and agree to accept the office of Regent, which he is to exercise with 
full power during the minority of the Peishwa, Madarow Narrain, in 
whose name he further engages to continue the Sicca and conduct 
the Government. But Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan having ex¬ 
pressed his doubts of the legitimacy of the Peishwa, Madarow Narrain, 
the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay do hereby engage, 
on Eugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan his strong solicitation, to request 
explicit orders from the Company, whether, in case he should prove 
to their satisfaction that the child is supposititious, they will place him 
in the Peishwaship, which, on such proof, will be his unquestionable 
right; and whether, in case the child should prove to be really the 
son of Narrain Eow, they will guarantee him an equal division 
of the Government and country on the Peishwa’s attaining to the 
age of seventeen, agreeable to what Eugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan 
says he is entitled to by his birth-right according to the Gentoo Law. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 41 

Article III. 

The Governor and Select Committee of Bombay do hereby stipu¬ 
late, and Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan, for their satisfaction, 
and that his upright intentions may appear manifest, doth hereby 
engage and agree that the person of the Peishwa, Madarow Narrain, 
shall be kept under the charge and custody of such persons as may 
be agreeable to the Select Committee, who wish that the child may 
be committed to the charge of Perwettybhoy, if she will undertake 
the charge; and, in such case, the Matchy of Poorunder, where the 
child is kept, must be guarded with a party of the Company's troops, 
and Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan may keep a chowkey on the 
outside of the gate, to see that no improper persons be admitted; but 
no person whatever must have admittance to the child’s presence 
without the permission of Perwettybhoy. In case Perwettybhoy 
should refuse to undertake the charge, the child shall be put under 
the care of any of his relations on the mother’s side; but should all 
these decline the trust, the child shall then be disposed of in such 
manner as may be deemed most advisable for his security and for 
the honor of the contracting parties. 

Article IY. 

* 

Moraba Purneese, Butcheba Pronder, and Tookajee Holkar having 
invited Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan to take upon himself the 
Government as Regent, and promised their assistance, Rugonath 
Row Bajeerow Purdan doth hereby engage, upon condition of their 
performing their promises to his and the Select Committee’s satis¬ 
faction, and behaving like faithful, obedient servants, that he will 
show favor to them, according to their ranks and services, in settling 
the offices of Government, and that their persons and fortunes shall 
be unmolested. 


Article V. 

The Governor and Select Committee engage not to interfere in 
the appointment or nomination of the officers to the forts, army, 
artillery, or revenues, or in the management of the Government, pro¬ 
vided nothing be done in breach of any of the Articles of the present 
VOL. III. E 


Tf 

PEIS! 

NoT 



42 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E 

\VA. 


r IL 


Treaty. Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan, on his part, faithfully 
promising to observe the terms mentioned in the circular tetter, with 
respect to the personal safety of those who, he may be of opinion, 
have injured him. 

Article YI. 

In consideration of the assistance to be afforded by the Honorable 
Company, for placing Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan in the Regency 
at Poona, Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth hereby engage to 
confirm and ratify the former Treaty concluded with him at Surat, the 
6th March 1775, and to cede and make over to the Honorable Company 
for ever, the several places and territories granted by the said Treaty, 
which were restored by the Treaty of Poorunder, and Bassein and its 
districts, and the island of Eennery, which were not put in posses¬ 
sion of the Company. The several acquisitions which "will devolve 
to the Honorable Company by virtue of this Article, are as follow : 

Bassein, fort and town, and the whole of its districts and depen¬ 
dencies, in their fullest extent, according to the just and fixed boun¬ 
daries of that Province. 

Jambooseer and Orpad, in the same full and ample manner as ceded 
by the Treaty of Surat. 

The island of Kennery * 

An assignment upon the Pergunnah of Occlaseer for the sum of 
75,000 Rupees per annum, as settled by the eighth Article of the 
Treaty of Surat 

There being also some small places, known by the name of the 
Autgoms, always annexed, and actually making a part of the district of 
Salsette, which have been withheld from the Company by the Poona 
Ministers, Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth hereby engage and. 
agree that the said Autgoms shall be ceded to the Honorable Company ; 
but although the Governor and Select Committee have ever understood 
that the Autgoms made a part of the district of Salsette, yet, if the con¬ 
trary should be made plainly to appear, they will give up their claim. 

Article VII. 

In addition to the several grants and cessions herein above speci¬ 
fied, Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth hereby engage and 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS; AND SUNNUDS. 


43 


promise to cede and make over for ever the Pcrgunnahs of 
Ahmood and Ilansoot, which grants are to -be considered as an in¬ 
stance of his good will and affection to the Honorable Company; the 
conditions upon which they were formerly granted not having, as he 
declares, been fulfilled. 


Article VIII. 

All the places herein ceded to the Honorable Company are to be 
considered as their sole right and property from the day this Treaty is 
executed, without any claim of chout to the Mahratta Government, 
or any other demand whatever, and may be taken possession of 
by the Company’s people whenever they may think proper ; for 
which purpose, liugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth, with these 
presents, deliver the necessary orders to the Mahratta officers to 
surrender the said places. Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth 
further promise and engage that, immediately after his taking charge 
of the Regency of Poona, he will execute and deliver to the Govern¬ 
ment of Bombay regular Sunnuds, under the Peisluva’s Sicca, for 
the several cessions granted to the Honorable Company by this 
Treaty. 


Article IX. 

Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan engages to pay and make good 
the charges and expenses of the army and stores with which he is now 
to be assisted ; which he hereby faithfully promises to make good in 
ready money as soon as the situation of his affairs will possibly permit : 
and, for the further security of the Honorable Company, he, by these 
presents, assigns over the Pcrgunnah of Versaul and the remainder 
of Occlaseer, the revenues of which are to be collected by his Amil¬ 
dars and paid to the Honorable Company, till the amount due for the 
expenses of the army is fully discharged ; but in case of failure herein, 
these Pergunnahs are to be put in possession of the Company, and the 
revenues collected by them till the said amount is fully discharged, 
when all right and title thereto on the part of the Honorable Company 
will be relinquished : or if Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan regu¬ 
larly pays the monthly sum stipulated in the next Article, the Honora¬ 
ble Company will not interfere with the said Pergunnahs. 



44 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND StlNNUDS. 


,'A. Article X. 

l1, Rugonath Bow Bajeerow Purdan engages to pay in full for the 
body of forces, consisting of four thousand men, with which he is 
t.o be assisted, the sum of two lakhs and a half of Kupees per month, 
which the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay agree to accept, 
without further account, in full of every expense attending the army, 
and is to commence from the day the forces leave Bombay. 

Article XI. 

Bugonath Bow Bajeerow Purdan faithfully promises and engages 
to discharge his present debt to the Company, as soon as the state 
of his finances will admit, agreeable to an account which will be 
delivered to him. 


Article XII. 

The English forces are to continue with Bugonath Bow Bajeerow 
Purdan until the object of this Treaty is accomplished, which is to 
place him in the Begency at Poona, and when that is effected, they 
are to be at liberty to return to Bombay. The Company will be at 
all times ready to assist Bugonath Bow Bajeerow Purdan with their 
forces so far as may be consistent with their other engagements, or the 
situation of their own affairs will permit. 

Article XIII. 

The several Treaties and Agreements subsisting between the Govern¬ 
ment of Bombay and the Mahratta Government are hereby ratified 
and confirmed, and shall be held and continued in as full force as when 
they were first concluded, unless otherwise provided for in this Treaty. 

Article XIV. 

After the establishment of Bugonath Bow Bajeerow Purdan in the 
Begency at Poona, there shall be a firm peace and alliance between 
the Honorable Company and the Mahratta Government. Bugonath 
Bow Bajeerow Purdan engages never to assist the enemies or molest 
the dominion of the Company in any part of India, nor to make war 
or commit depredations in the Carnatic, or any other part of the 
dominions of their ally, the Nabob of Arcot. The Governor and 
Select Committee of Bombay, in like manner, engage, in behalf of 



TREATIES, engagements, and sunnuds. 


45 


the Honorable Company, not to assist the enemies of Rugonath Row pE ^ J 
Bajeerow Purdan. No. 

Article. XV. 

Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan hereby engages and agrees that no 
European settlements shall be allowed to be made on the maritime 
coasts, or in any other part of the Mahratta dominions, without the 
consent of the Company or of their representatives being previously 
obtained, and that no manner of intercourse or connection shall be 
maintained between the Mahratta Government and the French nation; 
any failure in which stipulation will be considered as a breach of 
the alliance between the Mahratta Government and the Honorable 
Company. 

Article XVI. 

Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan doth hereby stipulate and 
engage that the English shall enjoy all their former privileges and 
freedom of trade in the Mahratta dominions without interruption; and 
he further engages to give all possible encouragement to the Honorable 
Company’s trade, and to promote, as far as he can, an exclusive vend 
to the English for European commodities in the Mahratta dominions; 
but the Honorable Company will make no settlement therein without 
permission from Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan. 

Article XVII. 

If any Article of the present Treaty should interfere with any 
Engagement formed by the Governor-General and Council not^yet 
known to the Governor and Select Committee of Bombay, such 
Article may be liable to be altered or amended as may be necessary. 

The foregoing Articles having been mutually agreed to by the 
Governor and Select Committee of Bombay, on the part of the 
Honorable Company and Rugonath Row Bajeerow Purdan, the 
contracting parties have interchangeably affixed their hands and 
seals and the seal of the Honorable Company, in Bombay Castle, 
the day and year above written. 

(Signed) William Hornet. 

„ John Caknac. 

„ Daniel Dearer. 



46 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SIJNNUDS. 


No. VIII. 

Convention of Wurgaon, 1779. 

Translation of the Articles of Agreement between Sreemunth Mhade Row Narrain, 

Pundit Purdhan, on the one part, and the English Company on the other part. 

In the time of the late Sreemunt Pundit Purdhan Mhadoo Row 
Bullal matters went on peaceably. Since then the English obtained 
possession of several places belonging to the Sircar, such as the islands 
of Salsette and Ouran, Jambooseer, and the Mehals and Pergunnah 
of Broach, both belonging to the Sircar and the Guicowar; and the 
English gave their aid to Rugonath Row Dada Sahib : upon which 
war having commenced, Colonel John Upton came from Calcutta 
with full powers and made an Agreement, and according to that 
Agreement matters were to go on between the Company and the 
Mahratta Sircar. But on the side of the English this Agreement was 
not adhered to. they having given aid to Rugonath Row, and, making 
preparations for war, mounted the ghauts, invaded the districts of the 
Mahratta Sircar, and began to-make hostilities, upon which the Sircar 
also prepared for war. At the district of Wurgaon, near Indonny 
Tullagaon, Mr. John Carnac and Colonel Charles Egerton, of the 
Select Committee of Bombay, being fully empowered, did depute 
Mr. Thomas Holmes and Mr. Fanner. Further, from the bemnnimr 
there was a friendship between the Sircar and the English, which being 
interrupted. Colonel John Upton made an Agreement, according to 
which Treaty matters did not proceed, and therefore that Treaty is 
annihilated ; and in the same manner, and on the same footing as the 
English and the Sircar were in the time of the late Mhadoo Row, 
in that manner are they now to remain ; the aid and cause of 
Rugoba to be given up, no protection to be afforded him, nor any 
aid to be afforded to the enemies of the Mahratta Sircar. The 
islands of Salsette and Ouran, and the other islands and places at 
Jambooseer and the Mehals of Broach, formerly belonging to the 
Mahratta Sircar and the Guicowar, such as Chickly, Verianl, &e., 
were taken possession of: these we give up, and agree to go on 
and remain as we were in the time of the late Peishwa, Mhadoo 
Row Bullal; upon which this Agreement is made with the Sircar. 
That in the time of the late Mhadoo Row Bullal, Pundit Purdhan, 


[E 

IYVA. 

vtiiT 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND S17NNUDS. 


47 


matters went on peaceably* and since then different places belonging 
to the Sircar* such as the islands*of Salsette and Ouran* and other 
islands* and further Jambooseer and other Mehals* and the Aumils 
of Broach* belonging to the Sircar and to the Guicowar* the English 
got possession of: these must be delivered back to the Sircar; and 
no aid or protection must in future be afforded to Rugonath Row* or 
to any of the enemies of the Sircar. In this manner do we faithfully 
promise to perform* and on the part of the Sircar good faith is also 
to be observed. Rugonath Row Dada Sahib was with us: he* by his own 
consent* committed himself* with all his effects* to the care of Tookajee 
Holkar and Madajee Scindia. The English army with us is now at 
Wurgaon: it must be permitted to proceed* with all its effects and 
appurtenances* to Bombay; and as security for this on the part of the 
Sircar* two persons will proceed belonging to each of these Sirdars* 
by name Nazo Gunish and Wissajee Samash* Ballarow Govind and 
Rama Cawn* to conduct the army to Bombay; and for this purpose 
troops shall be sent with you or not* as you please. The English 
army that is with us shall not offer any molestation to any person 
on the road. The Unturvedee and Bundelkhund Provinces and their 
Sirdars being always under the Sircar* no damage is to be done to them: 
and the English army from Calcutta having crossed the Nerbudda is 
now at Hussengabad; it is not to be permitted to proceed forwards* 
but it is to be sent back to Calcutta* and on the road no molestation 
is to be given to any one. The before-mentioned Agreement is 
formed by the mediation of Tookajee Holkar and Madajee Scindia, 
and according to it matters are in future to proceed without any 
kind of failure. This we pledge the English faith to observe* and the 
Sircar is also to observe it. No aid or protection is to be afforded 
to the French. 

Signed in the Mahratta Camp by Thomas Holmes and William 
G. Farmer. 

Signed in the English Camp by John Carnac and Charles Egerton. 


T] 

PEISJ 

No. 



48 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


E 

WA. 


III. 


Agreement of John Carnac, Esquire, Counsellor, and Colonel Egerton, and 
English Committee of Bombay, with Madajeb Scindia. 

That after falling out with the Sircar of Mhadoo Row Narrain, Pundit 
Purdhan, we with an army came upon the ghaut and remained at 
Tullagaon, on which you ordered a fighting, and we both parties did 
fight, in which we were defeated, returned back, and encamped at 
Wurgaon with Dada Sahib. We could hardly reach Bombay with 
our army and stores, considering which we sent Messrs. Farmer and 
Holmes to you, desiring you would come between us, and get the 
Sircar’s and our Treaty settled as before, and conduct us and the army 
to Bombay, on which you did suspend the war. You came between 
us and got the Sircar’s and English Treaty settled, and you promised 
to conduct us and the army to Bombay without molestation from 
any body. You made our escape entirely; all which we took into 
our consideration and were very glad. You are a principal officer 
and a well wisher to this Government, which has induced us to keep a 
friendship with you. This came into our mind, and we were satisfied 
that you made us free from the Sircar’s and every body’s molestation, 
and got the Treaty settled as before without any dispute from the 
Sircar; therefore we thought we should serve you, and for which 
reason have, of our free will and accord, agreed, under the King’s and 
Company’s seal, to deliver up to you the fort of Broach, with its 
Government, in the same manner as the Mogul did hold it, which fort 
is now in our possession and which we have given you. We further 
agree that we will, on our arrival at Bombay, obtain the Governor’s 
dustuck, under the King's seal, to the Killedar of Broach, and deliver 
the fort and its country in the manner the Mogul did hold it up to 
you, under oath no dispute shall arise in this. This we promise 
solemnly; and we have left Mr. Farmer and Mr. Charles Stewart 
with you as hostages for the performance of this Agreement. We will 
let no dispute arise. This we agree to in writing. 

Wurgaon, near Tullagaon , 27 th Julheze . 

N. B .—The above was translated by a native linguist, and is an 
exact copy thereof. 

Sunday , 17 th. —This morning Mr. Farmer returned to the Mahratta 
*Camp with Madajee Scindia’s Yakeel, with the papers executed. 

N. B .—The Governor and Council of Bombay refused to ratify 
this Convention. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


49 


No. IX. 

Treaty of Peace with the Mahrattas, 1782. 

reaty of perpetual friendship and alliance between the Honorable the English 
East India Company and the Peishwa Madhoo Row Pundit Purdhan, settled by 
Mr. David Anderson, on the part of the Honorable Company, in virtue of the 
powers delegated to him for thht purpose by the Honorable the Governor-General 
and Council appointed by the King and Parliament of Great Britain to direct and 
control all political affairs of the Honorable English East India Company in India; 
and by Maharaja Soubahdar Madhoo Row Scindia, as Plenipotentiary on the part 
of the Peishwa Madhoo Row Pundit Purdhan, Ballajee Pundit Nana Furnavese, 
and the whole of the Chiefs of the Mahratta nation, agreeably to the following 
Articles, which shall be ever binding on their heirs and successors, and the condi¬ 
tions of them to be invariably observed by both parties. 


T3 

PEIS 

No 


Article I. 

It is stipulated and agreed to between the Honorable the English 
ast India Company and the Peishwa, through the mediation of 
[adhoo Row Scindia, that all countries, places, cities, and forts, 
eluding Bassein, &c., which have been taken from the Peishwa 
aring the war that has arisen since the Treaty settled by Colonel 
pton, and have come into the possession of the English, shall be 
slivered up to the Peishwa; the territories, ports, cities, &c., 

► be restored, shall be delivered in within the space of two months 
om the period when this Treaty shall become complete (as herein- 
ter described), to such persons as the Peishwa, or his Minister, 
ana Furnavese, shall appoint. 

Article II. 

It is agreed between the English Company and the Peishwa, that 
ilsette and three other islands, viz. 9 Elephanta, Carranja, and Hog, 
hich are included in the Treaty of Colonel Upton, shall continue 
r ever in possession of the English. If any other islands have 
sen taken in the course of the present war, they shall be delivered 
3 to the Peishwa. 


Article III. 

Whereas it was stipulated in the fourth Article of the Treaty of 
olonel Upton, “ that the Peishwa and all the Chiefs of the Mahratta 



50 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNN IT DS. 


“ State do agree to give the English Company, for ever, all right 
'and title to the City of Broach, as full and complete as ever they 
“ collected from the Moguls or otherwise, without retaining any claim 
<e of chout, or any other claims whatsoever, so that the English Com- 
“pany shall possess it without participation or claim of any kind this 
Article is accordingly continued in full force and effect. 

Article IV. 

The Peishwa having formerly, in the Treaty of Colonel Upton, 
agreed, by way of friendship, to give up to the English a country 
of three lakhs of Rupees, near Broach, the English do now, at the 
request of Madhoo Row Scindia, consent to relinquish their claim 
to the said country in favor of the Peishwa. 

Article V. 

The country which Seajee and Putty Sing Guiekowar gave to the 
English, and which is mentioned in the seventh Article of the Treaty 
of Colonel Upton, being therein left in a state of suspense, the Eng¬ 
lish, with a view to obviate all future disputes, now agree that it shall 
be restored; and it is hereby settled that if the said country be a part 
of the established territory of the Guiekowar, it shall be restored to 
the Guiekowar ; and if it shall be a part of the Peishwa’s territories, it 
shall be restored to the Peishwa. 

Article YI. 

The English engage that, baling allowed Rugonath Row a period of 
four months from the time when this Treaty shall become complete 
to fix on a place of residence, they will not, after the expiration of 
the said period, afford him any support, protection, or assistance, nor 
supply him with money for his expenses : and the Peishwa on his part 
engages, that if Rugonath Row will voluntarily and of his own accord 
repair to Maharaja Madhoo Row Scindia, and quietly reside with 
him, the sum of 25,000 Rupees per month shall be paid him for his 
maintenance, and no injury whatever shall be offered to him by the 
Peishwa, or any of his people. 

Article VII. 

The Honorable English East India Company and the Peishwa 
being desirous that their respective allies shall be included in this 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


51 


peace, it is hereby mutually stipulated, that each party shall make 
peace with the allies of the other, in the manner hereinafter 
specified. 

Article VIII. 

The territory which has long been the established jagbire of Seajee 
Guickowar and Futty Sing Guickowar, that is to say, whatever terri¬ 
tory Fatty Sing Guickowar possessed at the commencement of the 
present war, shall hereafter for ever remain on the usual footing in his 
possession ; and the said Futty Sing shall, from the date of this Treaty 
being complete, pay for the future to the Peishwa the tribute as usual 
previous to the present war. and shall perform such services, and be 
subject to such obedience, as have long been established and customary. 
No claim shall bo made on the said Futty Sing by the Peishwa for the 
period that is past. 


Article IX. 

The Peishwa engages, that whereas the Nabob Hyder Ally Cawn 
having concluded a Treaty with him, hath disturbed and taken posses¬ 
sion of territories belonging to the English and their allies, he shall 
be made to relinquish them ; and they shall be restored to the Com¬ 
pany and the Nabob Mahomed Ally Cawn. All prisoners that have 
been taken on either side during the war shall be released ; and Hyder 
Ally Cawn shall be made to relinquish all such territories belonging to 
the English Company and their allies, as he may have taken possession 
of since the ninth of Ramzan in the year 1181, being the date of his 
Treaty with the Peishwa; and the said territories shall be delivered over 
to the English and the Nabob Mahomed Ally Cawn within six months 
after this Treaty being complete, and the English, in such case, agree 
that so long as Hyder Ally Cawn shall afterwards abstain from hosti¬ 
lities against them and their allies, and so long as he shall continue 
in friendship with the Peishwa, they will in no respect act hostilely 
towards him. 

Article X. 

The Peishwa engages, on his own behalf, as well as on behalf of his 
allies, the Nabob Nizam Ally Cawn, Ragojee Bhonsla Syna Saheb 
Soubah, and the Nabob Hyder Ally Cawn, that they shall, in every 


THE 

peishw 

" No. IX 



52 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


respect, maintain peace towards the English and their allies, the 
Nabob Asoph-ul-Dowlah Behauder, and the Nabob Mahomed Ally 
Cawn Behauder, and shall in no respect whatever give them any 
disturbance. The English encao-e on their own behalf, as well as on 
behalf of their allies, the Nabob Asoph-ul-Dowlah, and the Nabob 
Mahomed Ally Cawn, that they shall in every respect maintain 
peace towards the Peishwa and his allies, the Nabob Nizam Ally 
Cawn, and Ragojee Bhonsla Syna Saheb: and the English further 
engage on their own behalf, as well as on behalf of their allies, 
that they will maintain peace also towards the Nabob Hyder 
Ally Cawn, under the conditions specified in the 9th Article of this 
Treaty. 


Article XL 

The Honorable East India Company and the Peishwa mutually 
agree that the vessels of each shall afford no disturbance to the 
navigation of the vessels of the other: and the vessels of each shall 
be allowed access to the ports of the other, where they shall meet 
with no molestation, and the fullest protection shall be reciprocally 
afforded. 


Article XIL 

The Peishwa and Chiefs of the Mahratta State hereby agree that the 
English shall enjoy the privilege of trade, as formerly, in the Mahratta 
territories, and shall meet with no kind of interruption; and, in the 
same manner, the Honorable East India Company agree that the 
subjects of the Peishwa shall be allowed the privilege of trade, without 
interruption, in the territories of the English. 

Article XIII. 

The Peishwa hereby engages that he will not suffer any factories 
of other European nations to be established in his territories, or those 
of the Chiefs dependant on him, excepting only such as are already 
established by the Portuguese; and he will hold*no intercourse of 
friendship-with any other European nations : and the English on their 
part agree that they will not afford assistance to any nation of Deccan 
or Hindostan at enmity with the Peishwa. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


53 


Article XIV. i 

PEI 

The English and the Peishwa mutually agree that neither will ~ 
afford any kind of assistance to the enemies of the other. 

Article XV. 

The Honorable the Governor-General and Council of Fort William 
engage that they will not permit any of the Chiefs, dependants, or 
subjects of the English, the gentlemen of Bombay, Surat, or Madras, to 
act contrary at any place to the terms of this Treaty, In the same 
manner, the Peishwa Madhoo Row Pundit Purdhan engages that none 
of the Chiefs or subjects of the Mahratta State shall act contrary to 
them. 


Article XVL 

The Honorable East India Company, and the Peishwa Madhoo Row 
Pundit Purdhan, having the fullest confidence in Maharaja Soubah- 
dar Madhoo Row Scindia Behaudcr, they have both requested the 
said Maharaja to be the mutual guarantee for the perpetual and invari¬ 
able adherence of both parties to the conditions of this Treaty ; ami 
the said Madhoo Row Scindia, from a regard to the welfare of both 
States, hath accordingly taken upon himself the mutual guarantee. If 
either of the parties shall deviate from the conditions of this Treaty, 
the said Maharaja will join the other party, and will, to the utmost of 
his power, endeavour to bring the aggressor to a proper understanding. 

Article XVII. 

It is hereby agreed that whatever territoriCvS, forts, or cities, in 
Guzerat, were granted by Rugonath Row to the English, previous to 
the Treaty of Colonel Upton, and have come into their possession, 
the restitution of which was stipulated in the seventh Article of the 
said Treaty, shall be restored, agreeably to the terms of the said 
Article. 

This Treaty, consisting of 17 Articles, is settled at Salbey, in the 
Camp of Maharaja Soubahdar Madhoo Row Scindia, on the 4th of 
the month Jemmadul Saany, in the year 1197 of the Hygera, cor¬ 
responding with the 17th of March 1782, of the Christian era, by 
the said Maharaja and Mr. David Anderson; a copy hereof shall be 
sent by each of the above-named persons to their respective principals 



54 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


THE 

SISHWA. 

fo. IX. 


at Fort William and Poona, and when both copies being returned, 
the one under the seal of the Honorable East India Company, 
and signature of the Honorable the Governor-General and Council 
of Fort William, shall be delivered to Maharaja Madhoo Row 
Scindia Behauder, and the other under the seal of the Peishwa 
Madhoo Row, Pundit Purdhan, and the signature of Ballajee Pundit, 
Nana Furnavese, shall be delivered to Mr. David Anderson, this 
Treaty shall be deemed complete and ratified, and t^e Articles herein 
contained, shall become binding on both the contracting parties. 

(Written in the Mahratta character, by Ragoo Bhow Dewan.) ff In 
all seventeen Articles, on the fourth of Jemmad-ul-Akher, or fifth of 
Jeyet Adeek in the Shukul Patteh, in the year 1182.” 

(Subscribed in the Mahratta character by Madajee Scindia.) 
“ Agreed to what is above written in Persian.” 

o 


Witnesses : 


(Signed) David Anderson. 


(Signed) James Anderson. ' 

„ W. Blaine. 


(A true translation.) 

(Signed) James Anderson, 

, Assistant to the Embassy . 

Ratified at Fort William, the 6th of June 1782. 



Warren Hastings. 
Edward Wheeler. 
John Macpherson. 


(Signed) J. P. Auriol, 

Secretary. 

The following was added at the time of the Ratification at Poona 
and the final exchange at Gwalior. 

This Treaty, consisting of seventeen Articles, was ratified on the 
fifteenth of the month of Mohrummum-ul-Hirram, in the year 1196 of 



TREATIES. ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNtTDS. 


55 


the Hygera, and shall be invariably and perpetually binding on both 
the contracting parties. 

(Subscribed in the handwriting of Nana Furnavese.) “ Done by 
me, Ballajee Jennardin, on the 15th of Mohurrum, in the year 1183,” 
20th December 1782. 

On the 21st of Rubbi-ul-Awul, in the year 1197 of the Hygera, 
the above-written Treaty, under the seals of the Peishwa and the 
signature of Ballajee Pundit Furnavese, was delivered near Gwalior, 
to Mr. David Anderson, and a counterpart of the same, under the 
seal of the Company, and the signatures of the Governor-General 
and Council of Fort William, was in like manner delivered to Maha¬ 
raja Madajee Scindia Behauder, by which exchange the said Treaty 
is become complete, and from this date shall be binding on each of 
the contracting parties. 

(Subscribed in the handwriting of Madajee Scindia.) “21st of 
Rubbi-ul-Awul.” 


1 

PEI 
~ Nc 


(A true translation.) 


(Signed) Charles Wilkins. 

The counterpart subscribed by Mr David Anderson, 24th Febru¬ 
ary 1783. 

iY. B .—The small seal of the Peishwa affixed to the joinings of the 
different sheets. 


No. X. 

An Additional Trraty between the Honoraiu.e Comi*\ny and the Pr.rsmvv, of' the 

Mah u att \ Stvit;. 

Whereas, a Treaty of friendship between the Honorable Company 
and the Peishwa Pundit Purdhan having been ratified and completed on 
the 21st day of Rubbi-ul-Awul, of the year one thousand one hundred 
and ninety-seven of the Hejira ; and the following additions for the 
increase of the friendship and concord of the two Governments having 
been considered and approved of by both parties, are hereby agreed 
to by Mr. David Anderson on the part of the Company, and Maharaja 



56 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUKNUDS. 


THE 

2ISHWA. 

^o. 3L 


Soubahdar Madhoo Row Scindia on the part of the Peishwa; and are 
accordingly to be held binding on both parties. 

In the eleventh Article of the Treaty of peace relating to the 
mutual intercourse of shipping, the words, according to former custom 
not having been inserted, it is now therefore explained that the inter¬ 
course of shipping shall be carried on according to former custom. 

It is agreed to between the Honorable Company and the Peishwa 
Madhoo Row Pundit Purdhan, that if any Chief, merchant, or other 
person should hereafter fly from the territories of the Honorable 
Company to those of the Peishwa, or from the territories of the 
Peishwa to those of the Company, no protection shall be afforded to 
such person by either party. 

Concluded near Gwalior on the twenty-second day of Jummad-ul- 
Awul, of the year of the Hejira one thousand one hundred and ninety- 
seven, conformable to the twenty-sixth day of April one thousand 
seven hundred and eighty-three of the Christian era. 


Witness: 

(Signed) James Anderson. 


(Signed) D. Anderson. 


Ratified in Council, at Fort William, the 26 th of May 1783 . 


/ 

(Signed) 

Warren Hastings. 

/ Company’s 


Edward Wheeler. 

^ Seal. 

33 

John Macpiierson. 


J3 

John Stabiles. 


(Signed) 

J. P. Auriol, 

Secretary. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


57 


No. XI. 


PE 


Translation of a Treaty settled betwixt tbe Honorable East India Company and * 
the Peishwa Mahdoo Row Narain and Mahratta State. 


The Honorable East India Company and the Peishwa Mahdoo Row 
Narain Behauder having concluded and mutually ratified a Treaty near 
Gwalior, on the 21st of the month of Rubbee-ul-Awul, in the year 
of the TIegira 1197, in order to carry into execution the 9th Article of 
the said Treaty, the following stipulations are now settled and agreed 
on betwixt Mr. David Anderson and Malia Rajah Subahdar Mahdoo 
Row Scindia Behauder, on behalf of the said Honorable East India 
Company on the one part, and the Peishwa and Mahratta State on the 
othei', and shall accordingly be binding on both parties. 

The Peishwa having despatched letters to Tippoo Saib, will cause 
him to restore all the forts and territories belonging to the English 
Company and the Nabob Mahomed Ally that may have come into his 
possession, and release such prisoners as have fallen into his hands. 
If Tippoo Sail) agrees to these terms, and carries them into execution, 
and if he remains at peace with the Peishwa, the English will not after¬ 
wards act hostilely against him ; but if he refuses to comply with these 
requisitions of the Peishwa, in such case the Peishwa will immediately 
assist the English and make war against him ; after which neither of 
the contracting parties shall make peace with Tippoo Saib without the 
consent of the other. The territories and forts that may be con¬ 
quered from Tippoo Saib shall be divided in the following manner: 
the territories of the English Company and the Nabob Mahomed 
Ally will be delivered to the English Company and the Nabob Ma¬ 
homed Ally; the territories of the Peishwa and Mahratta State will 
be delivered to the Peishwa and Mahratta State. Whatever territories 
or forts may further be conquered from Tippoo Saib shall be equally 
divided betwixt the two contracting parties, according to the vicinity 
of their respective situations. But it is hereby stipulated that the 
Peishwa shall have no claim to any territories or forts belonging to 
Tippoo Saib, which the English may have conquered with their own 
force, and be in possession of previous to the actual commencement 
of hostilities by the troops of the Peishwa against Tippoo Saib. This 
Treaty being settled betwixt the English and the Peishwa, neither party 
shall deviate from it. 


VOL. in. 


H 



58 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


IWA. 

XII. 


Settled and concluded on the 1st of Zelhidge, in the year 1107 
of the Hegira (corresponding with the 28th of October in the year 
1783 of the Christian era) under the signatures of Mr. David Anderson 
and Maha Rajah Subahdar Mahdoo Row Scindia. 

Signed in the Mahratta language in the handwriting of Maha Rajah 
Subahdar Mahdoo Row Scindia. “ Agreed to what is above written on 
the 1st of Zelhidge, in the year 1197 of the Hegira, at Gwalior.” 

(Signed) D. Anderson. 

Gwalior , 28th October 1783. 

(A true translation,) 

(Signed) James Anderson, 

Assistant to the Embassy, 


No. XII. 

Treaty of Alliance between tbe Company, the Peishwa, and the Nizam, against 

Tippoo Sultan, 1790. 

Treaty of offensive and defensive alliance between the Honorable United English 
East India Company, the Peishwa Sewoy Mahdoo Row Narain Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder, and the Nabob Nazim Ally Khan Asof Jah Behauder, against Putty 
Ally Khan, known by the denomination of Tippoo Sultan, settled by Mr. Charles 
Warre Malet on the part of the said Honorable Company, with the said Pundit 
Purdhan, by virtue of the powers delegated to him by the Right Honorable Charles, 
Earl Cornwallis, k , g., Governor-General in Council, appointed by the Honorable 
the Court of Directors of the said ;Honorable Company to direct and control all 
their affairs in the East Indies. 


Article L 

The friendship subsisting between the States, agreeable to former 
Treaties, shall be increased by this. 


. Article II. 

Tippoo Sultan having engagements with the contracting parties, 
has, notwithstanding, acted with infidelity to them all, for which 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


59 


tcason they have united in a league, that to the utmost of their power pE j 
they may punish him, and deprive him of the means of disturbing the 
general tranquillity in future* 

Article III. 

This undertaking being resolved on, it is agreed that on Mr. Malet’s 
annunciation to Pundit Purdhan of the actual commencement of 
hostilities between the Honorable Company’s forces and the said Tippoo, 
and on Captain Kennaway’s announcing the same to the Nabob Asof 
Jah, the forces of the said Pundit Purdhan and Nabob Asof Jah, in 
number not less than 25,000, but asf many more and as much greater 
an equipment as may be, shall immediately invade the territories of 
the said Tippoo, and reduce as much of his dominions as possible 
before and during the rains; and after that season, the said Pundit 
Purdhan and Nabob will seriously and vigorously prosecute the war 
with potent army, well appointed and equipped with the requisite 
warlike apparatus. 

Article IV. 

The Nabob Asof Jah being furnished with two battalions of the 
Honorable Company’s forces. Pundit Purdhan shall have an option of 
being joined by an equal force, on the same terms, during the present 
war against Tippoo. The pay of the said battalions to be made good 
by Pundit Purdhan to the Honorable Company, in like manner as 
settled with the Nabob Asof Jah. 

Article V. 

On the said two battalions joining the Mahratta army, Pundit 
Purdhan agrees to allot 2,000 horse to remain and act in concert 
with them. But in the event of urgent service, on which cavalry 
alone can be employed, 1,000 of the said cavalry may be detached 
thereon, 1,000 remaining constantly with the battalions, whose pay 
shall be defrayed regularly, in ready money, every month, in the 
army or in Poona, at the option of Mr. Malet. 

Article VI. 

From the time of the- said battalions entering Pundit Purdhan’s 
territories, an agent on the part of the said Pundit Purdhan shall be 
ordered to attend the Commander, to execute such service as may occur. 



60 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNT7D& 


Article VII. 

If the Pight Honorable the Governor-General should require it 
body of cavalry to join the English forces, Pundit Purdhan and the 
Nabob Asof Jah shall furnish’to the number of 10,000, to march in 
one month from the time of their being demanded, by the shortest and 
safest route, with all possible expedition, to the place of their desti¬ 
nation, to act with the Company’s forces; but should any service 
occur practicable only by cavalry, they shall execute it, nor cavil on 
the clause tc to act with the Company’s forces.” The pay of the 
said cavalry to be defrayed monthly by the Honorable Company, at. 
the rate and on the conditions hereafter to be settled. 

Article VIII. 

If, in the prosecution of the war by the three allies, the enemy 
should gain a superiority over either, the others shall, to the utmost 
of their power, exert themselves to relieve the said party and distress 
the enemy. 


Article IX. 

The three contracting powers having agreed to enter into the pre¬ 
sent war, should their arms be crowned with success in the joint 
prosecution of it, an equal division shall be made of the acquisitions of 
territory, forts, and whatever each Sirkar or Government may be¬ 
come possessed of, from the time of each party commencing hostilities ; 
but should the Honorable Company’s forces make any acquisitions of 
territory from the enemy previous to the commencement of hostilities 
by the other parties, those parties shall not be entitled to any share 
thereof. In the general partition of territory, forts, &c., due attention 
shall be paid to the wishes and convenience of the parties, relatively 
to their respective frontiers. 


Article X. 

The underwritten Polygars and Zemindars being dependant on 
Pundit Purdhan and the Nabob Asof Jah, it is agreed that on their 
territories, forts, &c., falling into the hands of any of the allies, 
they shall be re-established therein, and the nuzzeranah that shall be 
£xed on that occasion shall be equally divided amongst the allies: 
but in future Pundit Purdhan and the Nabob Asof Jah shall collect 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND RUNNUD& 


61 


from them the usual Kundnee and Peshcush [which have been here¬ 
tofore annually collected. And should the said Polygars and Zemin¬ 
dars act unfaithfully towards Pundit Purdhan or the Nabob, or prove 
refractory in the discharge of their Kundnee and Peshcush, the said 
Pundit Purdhan and Nabob are to be at liberty to treat them as 
may be judged proper. The Chief of Shahnoor is to be subject to 
service with both Pundit Purdhan and the Nabob, and should he fail 
in the usual conditions thereof. Pundit Purdhan and the Nabob will 
act as they think proper. 


Ust of the Polygars and Zemindars . 


Chittledroog. 

Annagoondy. 

Harponelly. 

Bellaree. 

Rodroog. 


Keyehungoondeh. 

Cunnaghwarry. 

Kittoor. 

Hannoor. 


The district of Abdul Hakeem Khan, the Chief of Shahnoor. 


Article XL 

To preserve, as far as possible, consistency and concert in the con¬ 
duct of this important undertaking, a vakeel from each party shall 
be permitted to reside in the army of the others, for the purpose of 
communicating to each other their respective views and circumstances; 
and the representations of the contracting parties to each other shall 
be duly attended to/consistent with the circumstances and stipulations 
of this Treaty, 


Article XII. 

Afterthis Treaty is signed and sealed, it will become incumbent on 
the parties not to swerve from its conditions at the verbal or written 
instance of any person or persons whatever, or on any other pre¬ 
tence. And in the event of a peace being judged expedient, it 
shall be made by mutual consent, no party introducing unreasonable 
objections ; nor shall either of the parties enter into any separate 
negociations with Tippoo, Jbut ^on the receipt of any advance or 
message from him, by either party, it shall be communicated to the 
• others. 



62 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUD’S. 


IE 

awA. 

x5T 


Article XIII. 

If, after the conclusion of peace with Tippoo, he should molest oi“ 
attack either of the contracting parties, the others shall join to punish 
him ; the mode and conditions of effecting which shall be hereafter 
settled by the three contracting powers. 

Article XIV. 

This Treaty, consisting of fourteen Articles, being this day settled and 
concluded by Mr. Malet, with the Peishwa Sewoy Madhoo Row Nar- 
rain Pundit Purdhan Behauder, Mr. Malet has delivered to Pundit 
Purdhan one copy of the same, in English and Persian, signed and 
sealed by himself, and Pundit Purdhan has delivered to Mr. Malet 
another copy in Mahratta and Persian, executed by himself; and Mr. 
Malet has engaged to procure and deliver to Pundit Purdhan in 
seventy-five days, a ratified copy from the Governor, on the delivery 
of which the Treaty executed by Mr. Malet shall be returned. 

Poona , ls£ June 1790. 

(Signed) ■ C. W. Malet, 

President . 


(True copy.) 

(Signed) C. W. Malet. 

Ratified by the Governor-General in Council, at Fort William in 
Bengal, the 5th day of July 1790. 

(Signed) Cornwallis. 

„ Charles Stuart. 

» Peter Speke. 





TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


63 


No. XIII. 

Treaty with the Peishwa, commonly called the Treaty of Bassein, 

31st December 1802. 

Treaty of perpetual and general defensive alliance between the Honorable English 
East India Company and His Highness the Peishwa Babjee Roa Ragonath Roa 
Pundit Purdhan Behauder, his children, heirs, and successors, settled by Lieutenant- 
Colonel Barry Close, Resident at the Court of His Highness, by virtue of the powers 
delegated to him by IIis Excellency the Most Noble Richard Marquis Wellesley, 
Knight of the Most Illustrious Order of St. Patrick, one of His Britannic Majesty’s 
Most Honorable Privy Council, Governor-General in Council, appointed by the 
Honorable Court of Directors of the said Honorable Company, to direct and control 
all their affairs in the East Indies. 

Whereas, by the blessing of God, the relations of peace and friend¬ 
ship have uninterruptedly subsisted, for a length of time, between 
the Honorable English East India Company and Ilis Highness Iiao 
Pundit Purdhan Behauder, and have been confirmed at different 
periods by Treaties of amity and union, the powers aforesaid, advert¬ 
ing to the complexion of the times, have determined, with a view to 
the preservation of peace and tranquillity, to enter- into a general 
defensive alliance, for the complete and reciprocal protection of their 
respective territories, together with those of their several allies and 
dependants, against the unprovoked aggressions or unjust encroach¬ 
ments of all or any enemies whatever. 

Article I. 

The peace, union, and friendship, so long subsisting between the 
two States, shall be promoted and increased by this Treaty and shall 
be perpetual The friends and enemies of either shall be the friends 
and enemies of both ; and the contracting parties agree that all the 
former Treaties and Agreements between the two States, now in force 
and not contrary to the tenor of this Engagement, shall be confirmed 
by it. 

Article II. 

If any power or State whatever shall commit any act of unprovoked, 
hostility or aggression against either of the contracting parties, or 
against their respective dependants or allies, and after due represent- 



64 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SIJNNUDS. 

hwa refuse* to* enter into amicable explanation* or shall deny the 

xnx. just satisfaction or indemnity which the contracting parties shall have 
required* then the contracting parties will proceed to concert and 
prosecute such further measures as the case shall appear to demand. 

For the more distinct explanation of the true intent and effect 
of this Agreement* the Governor-General in Council* on behalf of the 
Honorable Company* hereby declares that the British Government 
will never permit any power or State whatever to commit with 
impunity any act of unprovoked hostility or aggression against the 
rights and territories of His Highness Rao Pundit Purdlian Behau- 
der, but will at all times maintain and defend the same in the same 
manner as the rights and territories of the Honorable Company are 
now maintained and defended. 

Article III. 

With a view to fulfil this Treaty of general defence and protection, 
His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder agrees to receive, and 
• the Honorable East India Company to furnish* a permanent subsidiary 
force of not less than six thousand regular Native Infantry, with the 
usual proportion of field pieces and European artillerymen attached* 
and with the proper equipment of warlike stores and ammunition, 
which force is to be accordingly stationed* in perpetuity, in Iiis said 
Highness’ territories. 

Article IV. 

For the regular payment of the whole expense of the said subsi¬ 
diary force, His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder hereby 
assigns and cedes, in perpetuity, to the Honorable East India Com¬ 
pany, all the territories detailed in the Schedule annexed to this Treaty. 

Article V. 

As it may be found that certain of the territories ceded by the fore¬ 
going Article to the Honorable Company may be inconvenient from 
their situation, His Highness'Rao Tundit Purdhan Behauder, for the 
•purpose of rendering the fc boundary£ line of the Honorable Company’s 
possession a good and well defended one, agrees that such exchanges 
of talooks or lands shall be made hereafter, on terms of a fair valuation 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


Go 


of their respective revenues, as the completion of the said purpose 
may require. And it is agreed and covenanted that the territories —^ 
to be assigned and ceded to the Honorable Company by the 4th 
Article, or in consequence of the exchange stipulated eventually in 
this Article, shall be subject to the exclusive management and author¬ 
ity of the said Company and of their officers. 

Article VI. 

Notwithstanding the total annual expense of the subsidiary force 
is estimated at twenty-five lakhs of Rupees, His said Highness hath 
agreed to cede, by Article IV., lands estimated to yield annually the 
sum of twenty-six lakhs of Rupees, the additional lakh being intended 
to meet possible deficiencies in the revenues of the said lands, and 
save the Honorable Company from loss. 

Article VII. 

After the conclusion of this Treaty, and as soon as the British Resi¬ 
dent shall signify to Ilis Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, 
that the Honorable Company's officers are prepared to take charge of 
the districts ceded by Article TV., His Highness will immediately 
issue the necessary perwannahs or orders to his officers, to deliver 
over charge of the same to the officers of the Honorable Com¬ 
pany. And it is hereby agreed and stipulated, that all collections 
made by Ilis Highness’ officers subsequently to the date of the Treaty, 
and before the officers of the Honorable Company shall have taken 
charge of the said districts, shall be carried to the credit of the Honor¬ 
able Company, and all claims to balances from the said districts, refer¬ 
ring to periods antecedent to the conclusion of this Treaty, shall be 
considered as null and void. 

Article VIII. 

All forts situated within the districts to be ceded as aforesaid 
shall be delivered to the officers of the Honorable Company with 
the said districts ; and His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behau¬ 
der engages that the said forts shall be delivered to the Honor¬ 
able Company without being injured or damaged, and with their 
equipment of ordnance, stores, and provisions.^ 

VOL. nu 


i 



66 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


[IE 

HWA, 


xm. 


Article IX. 

Grain, and all other articles of consumption, and provisions, and 
all sorts of materials for wearing apparel, together with the necessary 
numbers of cattle, horses, and camels, required for the use of the sub¬ 
sidiary force, shall be entirely exempted from duties; and the Com¬ 
manding Officer and officers of the said subsidiary force shall be 
treated in all respects in a manner suitable to the dignity and great¬ 
ness of both States. The subsidiary force will, at all times, be ready 
to execute services of importance, such as the protection of the person, 
of His Highness, his heirs, and successors, the overawing and chas¬ 
tisement of rebels, or exciters of disturbance in His Highness’ domi¬ 
nions, and the due correction of his subjects or dependants, who may 
withhold the payment of the Sircar’s just claims; but it is not to be 
employed on trifling occasions, nor like Sebundy to be stationed in the 
country to collect the revenues, nor against any of the principal 
branches of the Mahratta Empire, nor in levying contributions from 
Mahratta dependants in the manner of Moolkgeerre. 

Article X. 

Whereas much inconvenience has arisen from certain claims and 
demands of the Mahratta State affecting the City of Surat, it is 
agreed that a just calculation shall be made of the value of the said 
claims by His Highness Kao Pundit Purdhan Behauder and the 
Government of Bombay ; and in consequence of the intimate friend¬ 
ship now established between the contracting parties. His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder agrees, for himself, his heirs and 
successors, to relinquish, for ever, all the rights, claims, and privileges 
of the Mahratta State affecting the said City of Surat, and all collec¬ 
tions on that account shall cease and determine from the day-on 
which this Treaty shall be concluded ; in consideration of which act 
of friendship the Honorable East India Company agrees that a piece 
of land, yielding a sum equal to the estimated value of the said 
of the Mahratta State, shall be deducted from the districts ceded by 
Article IV.; and on the same principle,, and from similar considera¬ 
tions, His Highness further agrees, that the amount of the collections 
made for the Poona State, under the title of Nogabundy, in the Pergun- 
nahs of Chourassyand Chickley, shall be ascertained by an average 
taken from the receipts for a certain number of years, or by such other 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


67 


mode of calculation as may be determined on, and Ills said Highness pE 
doth further agree, for himself, his heirs and successors, to relinquish for -jf- 
ever the Nogabundy collections aforesaid, and they shall accordingly 
cease from the conclusion of this Treaty. And it is agreed and stipu¬ 
lated, that a piece of land, yielding a sum equal to the amount of the 
said Nogabundy collections, shall be deducted from the districts ceded 
.by Article IV., in the same manner as stipulated in regard to the 
cliout of Surat. 


Article XI. 

Whereas it has been usual for His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder to enlist and retain in his service Europeans of different 
countries, llis said Highness hereby agrees and stipulates, that in the 
event of war breaking out between the English and any European 
nation, and of discovery being made that any European or Europeans 
in his service, belonging to such nation at war with the English, shall 
have meditated injury towards the English, or have entered into 
intrigues hostile to their interest, such European or Europeans, so 
offending, shall he discharged by His said Highness, and not suffered 
to reside in his dominions. 


Article XII. 

Inasmuch as, by the present Treaty, the contracting parties are 
hound in a general defensive alliance, for mutual defence and protec¬ 
tion against all enemies, Ilia Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder 
consequently engages never to commit any act of personal hostility 
and aggression against llis Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Behauder, 
or any of the Honorable Company’s allies or dependants, or against 
any of the principal branches of the Mahratta Empire, or against any 
power whatever, and in the event of differences arising, whatever 
adjustment the Company's Government, weighing matters in the scale 
of truth and justice, may determine, shall meet with full approbation 
and acquiescence. 

Article XIIL 

And whereas certain differences, referring to past transactions, are 
known to subsist between the Sircar of His Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Behauder and the Sircar of His Highness the Nabob Asoph 



HE 

illYfA. 

XIIl7 


68 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS, 

Jah Behauder, and whereas an amicable adjustment of those differ¬ 
ences must be highly desirable for the welfare and benefit of both the 
said Sircars, His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, with a view 
to the above end, agrees and accordingly binus himself, his heirs and 
successors, to fulfil and conform to the stipulation of the Treaty of 
Mahr; and His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder further 
agrees, that on the basis of the fulfilment of the said Treaty of Mahr, * 
and of the claims of His Highness the Nabob Asoph Jah Behauder to be 
totally exempted from the payment of chout, the Honorable Company’s 
Government shall be entitled to arbitrate and .determine all such points, 
as may be in doubt or difference between the Sircars of their High¬ 
nesses aforementioned; and His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behau¬ 
der further agrees, that in the event of any differences arising between 
his Government and that of His Highness the Nabob Asopli Jah Behau¬ 
der, at any future period, the particulars of such differences shall be 
communicated to the Honorable East India Company, before any act of 
hostility shall be committed on either side, and the said Honorable 
Company interposing their mediation, in a way suitable to rectitude, 
friendship, and union, and mindful of justice and established usage, 
shall apply themselves to the adjustment of all such differences, con¬ 
formable to propriety and truth, and shall bring the parties to a right 
understanding. And it is further agreed, that whatever adjustment of 
any such differences the Company’s Government, weighing things in 
the scale of truth and justice, shall determine, that determination shall* 
without hesitation or objection, meet with the full approbation and 
acquiescence of both parties. It is however agreed, that this stipula¬ 
tion shall not prevent any amicable negociations which the Honor¬ 
able Company and the Courts of Poona and Hyderabad, respectively, 
may be desirous of opening, provided no such negociation shall be 
carried on between any of the three parties without full communication 
thereof to each other. 


Article 5IY. 

Whereas a Treaty of friendship and alliance has been concluded 
between the Honorable Company and Rajah Anund Rao Guiekwar 
Behauder, and whereas the said Treaty was meditated and executed, 
without any intention that it should infringe any of the just rights or 
claims of His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder affecting the 



70 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


HE 

m 

xiuT" 


active operations against the enemy, the largest force which they 
may be able to furnish over and above the said subsidiary force. 

Article XVI. 

Whenever war -shall appear probable. His Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Behauder engages to collect as many benjaries as possible, 
and to store as much grain as may be practicable in his frontier 
garrisons. 


Article XVII. 

As by the present Treaty the union and friendship of the two 
States is so firmly cemented that they may be considered as one and 
the same, His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engages 
neither to commence nor to pursue, in future, any negoeiations with 
any other power whatever, without giving previous notice and enter¬ 
ing into mutual consultation with the Honorable East India Company’s 
Government; and the Honorable Company’s Government, on their 
part, hereby declare that they have no manner of concern with any 
of His Highness’ children, relations, subjects, or servants, with respect 
to whom His Highness is absolute. 

Article XVIII. 

Inasmuch as, by the present Treaty of general defensive alliance, 
the ties of union are, with the blessing of God, so closely drawn, that 
the interests of the two States are become identified, it is further 
mutually agreed, that if disturbances shall at any time break out 
in the districts ceded to the Honorable Company by this Agreement, 
His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder shall permit such a 
proportion of the subsidiary troops as may be requisite to be em¬ 
ployed in quelling the ‘same within the said districts. If disturb¬ 
ances shall, at any time, break out in any part of His Highness’ 
dominions contiguous to the Company’s frontier, to which it might 
be inconvenient to detach any proportion of the subsidiary force, 
the British Government, in like manner, if required by His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, shall direct such proportion of the 
troops of the Company as may be most conveniently Rationed for 
the purpose, to assist in quelling the .said disturbances within His 
Highness’ dominions. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


69 


Sircars of the said Rajah, His said Highness adverting thereto, and T 
also to the intimate alliance now established between the contracting - 
parties, doth hereby formally acknowledge the existence of the said 
Treaty between the Honorable Company and Rajah Anund Rao 
Guickwar Behauder; and inasmuch as, by reason of certain unfinished 
transactions, the conclusion of which has been suspended from time to 
time, various demands and papers of accounts are found to subsist 
between the Government of His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder and the Sircar of the Rajah aforementioned. His said Ifigh- 
ness, placing full reliance on the impartiality, truth, and justice of the 
British Government, doth hereby agree that the said Government 
shall examine intc? and finally adjust the said demands and papers of 
accounts, and His said Highness further stipulates and binds himself, 
his heirs and successors, to abide by such adjustment as the British 
Government shall accordingly determine. 

Article XY. 

The contracting parties will employ all practical means of conci¬ 
liation to prevent the calamity of war, and for that purpose will, at all 
times, be ready to enter into amicable explanations with other States* 
and to cultivate and improve the general relations of peace and amity 
with all the powers of India, according to the true spirit and tenor of 
this defensive Treaty. But if a war should unfortunately break out 
between the contracting parties and any other power whatever, then 
His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engages, that with the 
reserve of two battalions of sepoys, which are to remain near His 
Highness’ person, the residue of the British subsidiary force, consisting • 
of four battalions of sepoys with their artillery, joined by six thousand 
infantry and ten thousand horse of His Highness’ own troops, and 
making together an army of ten thousand infantry and ten thousand 
cavalry, with the requisite train of artillery, and warlike stores of every 
kind, shall be immediately put in motion, for the purpose of opposing 
the enemy; and His Highness likewise engages to employ every 
further effort in his power, for the purpose of bringing into the field, 
as speedily as possible, the whole force which he may be able to 
supply from his dominions, with a view to the effectual prosecution 
and speedy termination of the said war. The Honorable Company, 
in the same manner, engage on their parts, in this case, to employ in 



n 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND STJNNUDS. 


‘E 

3WA. 

oil" 


Brought forward ... 3,59,900 1,65,000 

Durumpoory Choute ... ... ... ... 9,000 

Surat ditto ... ... ... ... ••• 42,100 

Customs ... ... . ... ... 83,000 

Between the Taptee and Nerhudda . 

Oolpah. 3,16,000 

Hansood ... ... ... ... ... ... 85,000 

Octisier. 78,000 

Nundary.. ... ... 65,000 

Total south of the Taptee and between Taptee 

and Nerbudda .. 10,38,000 

Deduct 20 per cent, on account of decrease of 

revenue . 2,07,600 

- 8,30,400 

Nahabundy of Chourassy and Chickley ... 20,000 

Phoolpoora 

Coomarria ^ . ;. 5,000 

Cattergom J 25,000 

2nd. —Prom the territories near the Toombuddrah:— 

Savancore, 26 Talooks. 10,22,838 

From Bankapoor ... ... ... ... 5,56,762 

- 15,79,600 

Grand Total ... 26,00,000 


Signed , sealed , and exchanged at Bassein , the 31s£ December, Anno 
Domini 1802, or the 5th Ramzan , Anno Higeree 1217. 


The Seal 
of Pundit 
Purdhan. 


(The Peishwa’s signature.) 


(A true copy.) 

(Signed) B> Close. 


Eatified by the Governor*General in Council on 11th February 
1803. 





TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


n 


Article XIX. ^ i 

PEI! 

It is finally declared that- this Treaty, which, according to the fore- No. 
going Articles, is meant for the support and credit of his said High¬ 
ness* Government, and to preserve it from loss and decline, shall last 
as long as the sun and moon shall endure. 

Signed , sealed , and exchanged at Bassein , the 31sf of December , 

Anno Domini 1802, or the 5th of Ramzan , Anno Higeree 1217. 


The Seal of 
Purdhan. 


(Signed) B. Close, 

Resident at Poona . 

(The Peishwa’s signature.) 


(A true copy.) 

(Signed) M. Wilks, 

Private Secretary . 


SCHEDULE of the Territories ceded in perpetuity by His Highness 
Badjee Rao Rogonath Pundit Purdhan Behauder to the Honorable 
English East India Company , agreeable to the Fourth Article of the 
annexed Treaty . 

l 5 ^_F rom the Province of Guzerat and territories south thereof:— 


Dundooka, together with Chooia, Komapoor, and Gogo ... 
Cambay, Choute and Nassoor ... ... ... 

South of the Taptee . 


Purnair ... 


27,000 

Bootseer ... . ... 


6,200 

Banwanny 


8,800 

Balsur 


85,000 

Parchole ... 


... 1,07,000 

Soopa . 


51,000 

Sarbaun. 


... 30,000 

Wallow ... 


30,000 

Bamdoo Kusba ... 

... ... ... 

7,900 

Waunsda Choute 

. 

7,000 


Carried over 

... 3,59,900 


1,05,000 

60,000 


1,65,000 













TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND STJNNUDS. 


73 


Supplemental to the Treaty of Bassein, 1803. 

A Treaty, consisting of 19 Articles, was concluded at Bassein 
between the Honorable English East India Company Behander and 
His Highness the Peishwa Badjee Rao Rogonath Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder. The following Articles of Engagement are now agreed on 
and settled, as supplemental to the said Treaty, by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Barry Close, on the part of the said Honorable Company, and Anund 
Rao Vakeel, on the part of the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, 
under full power and authority granted to them respectively for the 
purpose. 

Article L 

That of the territory ceded in perpetuity to the Honorable East 
India Company by the said Treaty of Bassein, the country of Save- 
nore, and Talook of Bancapoor, in the Carnatic, yielding an annual 
revenue of 16 lakhs of Rupees, shall be restored in perpetuity to the 
Sircar of the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, 

Article II. 

That of the territory ceded in perpetuity to the English East India 
Company by the Treaty of Bassein, the Pergunnah of Oolpah in 
Guzerat, yielding a revenue annually of three lakhs and sixteen 
thousand Rupees,- shall likewise be restored in perpetuity to the 
Sircar of the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, in order that it may 
be restored to Nursing Khundy Row, who has served the Sircar with 
fidelity and attachment. 

Article III. 

j That a regiment of native cavalry, of the same strength and com¬ 
plement as the cavalry regiments belonging to the Hyderabad sub¬ 
sidiary force, shall be added to the British Poona subsidiary force. 

Article IV. 

In the fifteenth Article of the Treaty of Bassein it is stipulated that 
ten thousand cavalry and six thousand infantry, with a due proportion 
of ordnance and military stores, shall be furnished by the said Rao 
Pundit Purdhan Behauder, and in addition thereto such further 
force as the Sircar of the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder should 

VOL. in. 

K 


THE 

PEISHW 

No. XII 



74 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND STXNNUDS. 


K 

WA. 

:iii. 


be able to bring into tbe field. This stipulation is now annulled, and, 
in lieu thereof, it is agreed and covenanted, that in time of war the 
said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder shall appoint and furnish five 
thousand cavalry and three thousand infantry, with a due proportion 
of ordnance and military stores, and in addition thereto such further 
force as the said Rao Pundit Purdhan JBehauder shall be able to bring 
into the field. 


Article V. 

That a corps of Mahratta cavalry, amounting to five thousand, shall 
be maintained by the British Government during the present war, for 
the service of the Poona State, under the orders of the British Govern¬ 
ment; of which five thousand horse, two thousand shall serve with 
His Highness the Peishwa, and the remaining three thousand with 
the British army in the field; and in the said five thousand Mahratta 
cavalry are not to be included the JMahratta. troops serving with 
the British army under the Chieftains Bapoojee, Gunneis Punt 
Goklah, and Seedojee Row Nimalun, which troops shall continue to 
be subsisted at the charge of Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder. 


Article VI. 

By the first and second Articles of this Agreement, territory yielding 
an annual revenue of 19,16,000 Rupees is restored to the Sircar of 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder; in lieu thereof and for the pur- 
poses hereafter mentioned, the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder 
agrees and stipulates to cede in perpetuity to the Honorable English 
East India Company, from the Province of Bundelcund, conquered 
for the Poona State by Ali Behauder, territory yielding an estimated 
annual revenue of 36,16,000 Rupees, agreeably to the following detail : 

• .i, n lieu ° f the countr y of Savenore, and Talooks of Buncapoor 
” the Carnatic, and the Pergunnah of Oolpah, in Guzerat, a tract of 
territory, yielding an annnal revenue of 19,16,000 Rupees. 

2. On account of the stated high value of Oolpah, a tract of ter- 

Per^unni § “ ^ ° f fi °' 000 for that 

. 3 * entire ex P en se of the regiment of cavalry men- 

“ r C« * tract of teitory ■ -- 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


75 


4. To serve as an equivalent for .the expense to be incurred by ^ 
tlie British Government in paying and maintaining, during the present 
war, the 5,000 cavalry mentioned in Article V., a tract of territory 
yielding an annual revenue of 5,00,000 Rupees ; and lastly, a tract of 
territory yielding an annual revenue of 4,00,000 Rupees, to meet the 
extraordinary expense which the British Government must be subject 
to in establishing its authority in Bundelcund, which is disturbed and 
ravaged by rebels who must be subdued and punished. Total ceded 
from Bundelcund, 36,16,000 Rupees. 

Article VII. 

The whole of the foregoing territory, ceded as above from Bun- 
delcund to the Honorable English East India Company, shall be taken 
from those quarters of the province most contiguous to the British 
possessions, and in every respect most convenient for the British 
Government. 

Article VIII. 

Inasmuch as the Pergunnah of Oolpah was particularly valuable to 
the Honorable Company’s Government, by reason of its proximity to 
the City of Surat, in the prosperity of which the British Government 
bears an anxious concern, it is accordingly agreed and stipulated, that 
the said Pergunnah of Oolpah shall be so managed and governed, 
at all times, by the Mahratta authority, as to conduce to the con¬ 
venience of the said City, by attention to the rules of good neigh¬ 
bourhood, and the promotion of an amicable and commercial inter¬ 
course between the inhabitants of both sides. And inasmuch as the 
sovereignty of the River Taptee doth belong to the British Govern¬ 
ment, it is accordingly agreed and covenanted, that the Mahratta 
authority in Oolpah shall have no right or concern whatever in the 
wreck of any vessel that may be cast upon any part of the Oolpah 
territory, connecting with the said River Taptee, but be bound, in the 
event of any such wreck, to render the vessel all practicable aid, for 
which the parties assisting shall be entitled to receive from the owners 
of the wreck a just and reasonable compensation. 

Signed , sealed , and exchanged at Poona , the 1 6th December , An?io 
Domini 1803, or the Ramzan , Anno Higeree 1218. 

Ratified by the Governor-General in Council, the 7 th January 1804. 



SE 

HWA. 

XIV. 


ij.0 treaties, engagements, and sunnuds. 

No. XIV. 

Partition Treaty of Poona with His Highness the Peishwa, 1804. 

Treaty for the settlement of general peace in Hindostan and the Deccan, and for 
the confirmation of the friendship subsisting between the Honorable English Eos 
India Company and its allies, His Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan, and His 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Peishwa Behauder, settled between the said Honor¬ 
able Company and the said allies by Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, Resident at 
the Court of His Highness the Peishwa, in virtue of the powers delegated to him by 
His Excellency the Most Noble Richard Marquis Wellesley, Knight of tlie Most 
Illustrious Order of St.Patrick, one of His Majesty’s Most Honorable Privy Council, 
Governor-General in Council of all the British possessions, and Captain-General ot 
all the British land forces in the East Indies. 

Whereas, by the terms of the Treaties of peace concluded by Major- 
General the Honorable Arthur Wellesley, on the part of the Honor¬ 
able Company and its allies, with Maharajah Senah Saheb Soubah, 
Eajah of Berar, at Deogaum, on the 17th of December 1803, and 
with Maharajah Dowlut Bow Scindia at Surje Anjengaum, on the 
30th of that month, which Treaties have been duly ratified by the 
Governor-General in Council, and by the allies of the British Govern¬ 
ment, certain forts and territories have been ceded by Maharajah 
Senah Saheb Soubah, and by Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia, to 
the Honorable Company and its allies, the following Articles of Agree¬ 
ment, for the settlement of the said forts and territories, have been 
concluded by the British Government and by the said allies:— 

Article L 

The Province of Cuttack, including the Port and District of Balasore, 
and all cessions, of every description, made by the 2nd Article of the 
Treaty of Deogaum, or by any Treaties which have been confirmed 
by the tenth Article of the said Treaty of Deogaum, shall belong in 
perpetual sovereignty to the Honorable English East India Company. 

Article II. 

The territories of which Maharajah Senah Saheb Soubah for¬ 
merly collected the revenues in participation with His Highness 
the Soubahdar of the Deccan, and those formerly possessed by Maha¬ 
rajah Senah Saheb Soubah to the westward of the River Wurdah, 
ceded by the 3rd Article of the Treaty of Deogaum, and the territory 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


77 


situated to tlie southward of the hills on which are the forts of pE 
Nernullah and Gawilghur, and to the westward of the River “Wui-dab, “jj; 
stated by the 4th Article of the Treaty of Deogaum to belong to the 
British Government and its allies, shall belong in perpetual sove¬ 
reignty to His Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan, with the excep¬ 
tion of the districts reserved to Senah Saheb Soubah in the 5tli 
Article of the said Treaty of Deogaum. 

Article III. 

All the forts, territories, and rights of Maharajah Dowlut Row 
Scindia in the Doab, or country situated between the Jumna and 
Ganges, and all his forts, territories, rights, and interests in the coun¬ 
tries which are to the northward of those of the Rajahs of Jeypoor and 
Jodepoor, and of the Rana of Gohud, ceded by the 2nd Article of the 
Treaty of Surje Anjengaum, shall belong in perpetual sovereignty to 
the Honorable Company. 


Article IV. 

The Fort of Baroach and territory depending thereon, ceded by 
the 3rd Article of the Treaty of Surje Anjengaum shall belong in 
perpetual sovereignty to the Honorable Company. 

Article Y. 

The Fort and City of Ahmednuggur, together with such part of the 
territory depending thereon, as is ceded by the 3rd Article of the 
Treaty of Surje Anjengaum to the Honorable Company and its allies, 
shall belong in perpetual sovereignty to His Highness the Peishwa. 

Article VI. 

All the territories which belonged to Maharajah Dowlut Row Scindia 
before the commencement of the late war, situated to the southward 
of the hills called the Adjuntee Hills, including the Fort and District 
of Jalnapore, the Town and District of Gandapore, and all other 
districts between that range of hills and the River Godavery, ceded 
by the 4th Article of the Treaty of Surje Anjengaum to the Honorable 
Company and its allies, shall belong in perpetual sovereignty to His 
Highness the Soubahdar of the Deccan. 



78 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


THE 

SISHWA. 

oTxiv.. 


Article VII. 

All cessions made to the Honorable Company by any Treaties 
which have been confirmed by the 9th Article of the Treaty of Surje 
Anjengaum, shall belong in perpetual sovereignty to the Honorable 
Company. 


Article VIII. 

This Treaty, consisting of eight Articles, being this day, the 14th of 
May 1804 A. D., corresponding with the 3rd of Suffer, 1219 A. H., 
settled and concluded at Poona, by Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, 
Resident with His Highness the Peishwa, Lieutenant-Colonel Close 
has delivered to His said Highness a copy of the same in English, 
Persian, and Mahratta, under the seal and signature of the said 
Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Close, and His Highness the Peishwa 
has delivered to the said Lieutenant-Colonel Close another copy., also 
in Persian, Mahratta, and English, bearing His Highness’ seal., and 
Lieutenant-Colonel Close aforesaid has engaged to procure and deliver 
to His said Highness, without delay, a copy of the same, duly ratified 
by His Excellency the Most Noble the Governor-General in Council, 
on the receipt of which by His said Highness, the present Treaty 
shall be deemed complete and binding on the Honorable the English 
East India Company and on his Highness, and the copy of it °now 
delivered to His said Highness shall be returned. 

Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on 4th June 1804. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS. AND SUNNUDS. 


79 


No. XV. i 

PEI! 

Treaty between the Honorable East India Company and His Highness Bajee 
Rao Rughonath Rao Pundit Purdhan, bis Heirs and Successors, concluded at 
Poona, on the 13th of Juno, by the Honorable M. Elphinstone on the part of 
the Honorable Company, and by Moro Dixit and Ballajee Luchmun on the 
part of the Rao PuNtfrr Purdhan, by virtue of full powers from their respective 
Governments. 

"Whereas a Treaty of general defensive alliance, consisting of nine¬ 
teen Articles, was concluded at Bassein between the Honorable East 
* India Company and His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder; 
and whereas seven Articles of Agreement, supplemental to the said 
Treaty, were agreed on at Poona between the same powers ; and 
whereas certain disputes have since arisen which it is the desire of 
both parties to remove; with a view to adjusting the said disputes, 
and to the better fulfilment of the said alliance, the following Treaty 
has been concluded between the two States :— 

Article I. 

Whereas Trimbuckjee Dainglia, by the murder of Gungadhur 
Shastry, the public Minister of the Guickwar State, rendered himself 
obnoxious to public justice, and it became the peculiar duty both of 
the Honorable East India Company’s Government and of that of 
His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder to inflict on him such 
punishment as might mark their detestation of his crimes and deter 
others from committing the like atrocities; and whereas Trimbuckjee 
Dainglia has escaped from the custody of the Honorable East India 
Company’s Government, to which he was made over by Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Behauder, and has since added to his crimes by assembling 
banditti and committing various acts of plunder and murder, His High¬ 
ness Rao Pundit. Purdhan Behauder solemnly engages never to afford to 
the said Trimbuckjee any countenance or protection whatever, but to 
use his utmost efforts to seize and deliver him up to the Honorable East 
India Company ; and until such time as the said Dainglia may be deli¬ 
vered up, the family of the said Dainglia are to remain as hostages 
in the hands of the Honorable Company’s Government; His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder also engages severely to punish all 
who participated in the said Trimbuckjee’s rebellion, and who have 
not surrendered themselves according to His Highness’ proclamation. 



HE 

I-IWA. 

XV. 


SO TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS* 

Article II. 

All Articles of the Treaty of Bassein, and of the Supplemental 
Articles concluded at Poona, which are not contrary to the tenor ol 
the present engagement, are hereby confirmed. 

Article III. 

By the eleventh Article of the Treaty of Bassein, His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engages to dismiss all Europeans, Na¬ 
tives of States at war with great Britain, who shall meditate injury . 
towards the English. His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder 
now engages never to admit into his territories any subject of any 
European or American power whatever, without the previous consent 
of the British Government. 


Article IV. 

By the (17th) seventeenth Article of the Treaty of Bassein, His 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engaged neither to com¬ 
mence nor pursue in future any negociations with any power whatever, 
without giving previous notice to, and entering into mutual consul¬ 
tation with, the Honorable East India Company’s Government; in 
order to the more effectual fulfilment of this Article, His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder hereby engages neither to maintain 
Vakeels or other Agents at the Court of any power whatever, nor 
to permit the residence of Vakeels or other Agents from any power 
whatever at his Court, and His Highness further engages to hold no 
communication with any power whatever, except through the Resident 
or other Minister of the Honorable Company’s Government residing 
at His Highness’ Court; and His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder hereby for himself, and for his heirs and successors, recog¬ 
nizes the dissolution in form and substance of the Mahratta confe¬ 
deracy, and renounces all connexion whatever with the other Mahratta 
powers, whether arising from his former situation of executive head 
of the Mahratta Empire, or from any other cause. Nothing contained 
in this Article shall affect any rights which His Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Behauder may possess over any Chiefs of the Mahratta 
State between the Rivers Nerbudda and Toombuddra, and to the 
west of the western frontier of His Highness the Nizam’s Dominions, 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

who are now in obedience to His Highness Rao Pandit Purdhan 
Behander. His Highness, however, renounces all claims on the Rajah No 
of Colapore, and on the Government of Sawunt Warree, and engages 
to advance no claims on the lands of their Highnesses Scindia, Holkar, 
the Rajah of Berar, and the Guickwar, which may be situated Within 
the limits before-mentioned. 


Article V. 

His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder specially renounces 
all future demands on His Highness Rajah Anund Rao Guickwar 
Behauder, whether resulting from the former supremacy of the said 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, as executive head of the Mahratta 
Empire, or from any other cause; but as various demands and papers 
of accounts, arising from certain unfinished transactions, subsist be* 
tween the Government of His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behau¬ 
der and the Government of the Rajah above-mentioned, which His 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder agreed, by the fourteenth 
Article of the Treaty of Bassein, to submit to the arbitration of the 
Honorable Company’s Government, those demands are hereby declar¬ 
ed to be in force as far as relates to past times; but His Highness 
Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder now consents, that in the event of the 
payment of the annual sum of four lakhs of Rupees by Rajah Anund 
Rao Guickwar Behauder, the above agreement shall be set aside, 
and the said Rajah shall be discharged from all claims what¬ 
ever on the part of the said Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder. In 
case Ilis Highness Rajah Anund Rao Guickwar Behauder should 
not consent to the payment of the annual sum of four lakhs of Rupees, 
then the agreement above-mentioned, which forms part of the (14th) 
fourteenth Article of the Treaty of Bassein, shall remain in force and 
binding on both parties, but His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder hereby distinctly renounces all future claims on His High¬ 
ness Rajah Anund Rao Guickwar Behauder. 

Article VI. 

In the fourth Supplemental Article to the Treaty of Bassein, it is 
agreed that in time of war His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behau¬ 
der shall appoint and furnish five thousand cavalry and three thousand 
infantry, with a due proportion. of ordnance and military stores, to 

VOL. III. L 



82 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND STJNNUDS. 


ffE 

HWA. 


XV, 


join and act with the British subsidiary force, and in addition tliere- 
' to, His Highness agrees to employ in the war such further force as he 
shall be able to bring into the field. That Article is hereby annulled; 
and in lieu thereof it is agreed that His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder shall place at the disposal of the British Government suffi¬ 
cient funds for the payment of a force of five thousand cavalry, and 
three thousand infantry, and the provision of a due proportion of 
ordnance and military stores; on the fulfilment of which engagement 
the British Government shall have no further claim to the services 
of the contingent above-mentioned. But Plis Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Behauder shall still be bound as formerly to co-operate in the 
war with such a force as he may be able to bring into the field; the 
Honorable Company in the same manner engaging to employ in active 
operations against the enemy the largest force which they may be 
able to furnish over and above the subsidiary force. 

Article VII. 

To enable the British Government to supply the place of the con¬ 
tingent above-mentioned, His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behau¬ 
der hereby assigns, and cedes in perpetuity, to the Honorable Company 
all the territories and rights detailed in the schedule annexed to this 
Treaty, and His Highness expressly renounces all claims and preten¬ 
sions of whatever description on the countries enumerated in the 
said schedule, and all connexion with the Chiefs and Boomeas of 
those countries. 


Article VIII. 

As it may be found that certain of the territories ceded by the 
foregoing Article maybe inconvenient from their situation. His High¬ 
ness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, for the purpose of rendering the 
boundary line a good and well defined one, agrees that such exchange 
of talooks and lauds shall be made hereafter, on terms of a fair valua¬ 
tion of their respective revenues, as the completion of the said purpose 
may require, and it is agreed and covenanted that the territories to be 
assipied and ceded to the Honorable Company by the (7th) seventh 
Article, or m consequence of the exchange stipulated eventually in this 
Article, shall be subject to the exclusive management and authority 
of the said Company and their officers. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


S3 


Article IX. : 

Jr iL 

His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behauder will immediately issue N< 
the necessary purwannahs, or orders to His Highness’ Officers, to deliver 
over charge of the districts ceded by Article seventh to the Officers of 
the Honorable Company, and it is hereby agreed and stipulated, that 
all collections made by His Highness’ Officers, subsequently to the 
commencement of the Hindoo year (answering to the 5th of June 1817 
A. D.), shall be carried to the credit of the Honorable Company, and 
all claims to balances from the said districts, referring to periods 
antecedent to the conclusion of this Treaty, shall be considered as 
null and void. 


Article X. 

All forts situated within the districts ceded as aforesaid, shall be 
delivered to the Officers of the Honorable Company, with the said 
districts, and His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engages 
that the said forts shall be delivered to the Honorable Company 
without being injured or damaged. 

Article XI. 

It is further agreed that if disturbances shall at any time break out 
in the districts ceded to the Honorable Company by this Agreement, 
His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behauder shall permit such a pro¬ 
portion of the subsidiary troops, as may be requisite, to be employed 
in quelling the same within the said districts. 

Article XII. 

His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder on his own part, and 
on the part of his heirs and successors, hereby cedes to the Honorable 
East India Company, in perpetual sovereignty, the Fort of Ahmed- 
nuggur, together with as much of the adjoining country as may be 
within two thousand (2,000) yards of the fort, measured from the foot 
of the glacis. His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behauder engages 
to furnish such pasture lands as may be required for the use of the 
subsidiary force, at the most convenient place adjoining to the 
cantonments of the different divisions of the said force ; and although 
by the spirit of the Treaty of Bassein the British Government is 
already entitled to send such troops into His Highness' territories as 



84 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


IE 

3WA. 

XV. 


may appear requisite for the fulfilment of the terms of that Treaty, yet 
" to remove all doubts on that point His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder further engages to admit the residence, within his dominions, 
of any number of British troops in addition to the subsidiary force 
that the British Government may think necessary, and to permit all 
British troops to pass through all parts of his dominions without 
obstruction, provided that nothing in this Article is to entitle the 
British Government to make any demand on His Highness for the 
expense of the additional troops so residing. 

Article XIII. 

His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder hereby cedes to the 
Honorable East India Company all his rights, interests, or pretensions 
feudal, territorial, or pecuniary, in the Province of Bumlelcund, 
including Saugor, Jansi, and the lands held by Nana Govind Rao, and 
agrees to relinquish all connection with the Chiefs in that quarter. 

Article XIY. 

His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder for himself, and for 
his heirs and successors, hereby cedes to the Honorable East India 
Company all his rights and territories in Malwa, which were secured 
to him by the 11th Article of the Treaty of Serje Anjengaum, and 
generally all rights and pretensions of every denomination which 
he may possess in the country to the north of the River Nerbudda, 
excepting those which he possesses in the Province of Guzerat; and 
engages never more to interfere in the affairs of Hindostan. 

Article XY. 

His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan Behauder formerly rented hie 
share of the City and Province of Ahmedabad, including the tribute 
of Kattiwar, to Bhugwunt Eao Guickwar, at the rate of four lakhs 
and a half of Eupees per annum/and granted a Sunnud to that effect 
under date the twenty-seventh Jemadee-ul-Akhir (1205) one thousand 
two hundred and five. The tribute of Kattiwar formerly comprehended 
in that farm has been ceded to the British Government by the 
seventh Article of the present Treaty. His Highness now agrees to 
grant the remainder of the said farm in perpetuity to His Highness 
Eajah Anund Eao Guickwar Behauder, and to his heirs and successors 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


85 


on the same terms as those contained in the above-mentioned Sunnud, _ r r 

PEI 

dated the twenty-seventh of Jumadee-nl-Akhir, A. IT., one thou- —^ 
sand two hundred and five (1205), excepting the terms contained in 
the second (2nd), eighth (8th), eleventh (11th), and fifteenth (15th) 
Articles, which are hereby abrogated and annulled. In consideration 
of the greatness of the actual revenue of the City and Province of 
Ahmedabad, and likewise of the loss to which His Highness Rao 
Pundit Purdhan Bohauder has already been subjected by his renunci¬ 
ation of all future claims on His Highness Rajah Anund Rao Guick- 
war Behauder, and by his accepting an annual payment of four lakhs 
in lieu of all claims actually due up to the present day, it is agreed 
that the former sum of four lakhs and a half of Rupees shall still be 
paid for the farm of Ahmedabad, notwithstanding the separation of the 
tribute of Kattiwar. 


Article XVL 

Whereas certain Articles of Agreement (six in number) regarding 
the settlement of the southern jaghiredars, were presented by the 
Resident at Poona to His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder, on 
the (Jth of July, one thousand eight hundred and twelve (1812) A. D., 
to which, after a modification suggested by His Highness and sub¬ 
mitted to him on- the seventh of the same month. His Highness gave 
his entire consent, those Articles are hereby recognized and declared 
to be binding on both parties, as much as if they formed part of the 
present Treaty ; and whereas various disputes have arisen regarding the 
muster of the troops of the said jaghiredars, and the manners and periods 
of their service, His Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Behauder hereby 
agrees to be guided entirely by the advice of the British Government 
with regard to those subjects, and to issue no orders to the jaghiredars 
without full concert with the British Government; His Highness 
hereby agrees to restore to the said jaghiredars any of the lands 
included in their Sunnuds which may now be in His Highness’ 
possession; and in consideration of the recommendation of the British 
Government His Highness hereby consents to restore to Madlioo 
Rao Rastia the jaghire formerly held by him and resumed in the 
year one thousand eight hundred and fourteen, and to permit him 
to hold that jaghire as formerly, under the guarantee of the British 
Government. 



86 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SCNNGDS. 


IE 

dWA. 

XV. 


Article XYII. 

The fort and territory of Mailghaut having been taken pos¬ 
session of by the troops of His Highness Eao Pundit Purdhan 
Behauder without concert with the British Government, and Ilis 
Highness’ occupation of that fortress having since occasioned various 
inconveniences to the other allies, His Highness Rao Pundit Purdlian 
Behauder engages to withdraw his troops from Mailghaut, and he here¬ 
by renounces all claims and pretensions to the said fort and territory, 
and to all other territories occupied by his troops during the expedi¬ 
tion of one thousand eight hundred and eleven. 

Article XYIII. 

This Treaty, consisting of eighteen Articles, being this day 
settled and concluded at Poona by the Honorable M. Elphinstone, 
Moro Dixit and Ballajee Luchmun, Mr. Elphinstone has delivered to 
His Highness the Peishwa a copy of the same in English, Persian, 
and Mahratta, under the seal and signature of the said Honorable 
M. Elphinstone, and His Highness the Peishwa has delivered to the 
said Honorable M. Elphinstone another copy, also in English, Persian, 
and Mahratta, bearing His Highness’ seal, and the Honorable M, 
Elphinstone aforesaid has engaged to procure and deliver to Plis High¬ 
ness without delay a copy of the same, duly ratified by His Excellency 
the Most Noble Francis Marquis Hastings, k. g., Governor-General, 
&c., &c., in Council, on the receipt of which by His said Highness the 
present Treaty shall be deemed complete, and binding on the Honor¬ 
able East India Company and on His Highness the Peishwa, and the 
copy now delivered to His said Highness shall be returned. 



Governor-Gene¬ 
ral’s small 
Seal 


(Signed) 


(Pcishwa’s Signature.) 


Hastings, 

N. B. Edmonstone. 
•A. Seton. 

G . Dowdeswell. 



THEATIKS, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUXNUDS. 


87 


Ratified by the Governor-General in Council, this fifth day of pE ' 
July, one thousand eight hundred and seventeen, at Fort William —^ 
in Bengal. 

(Signed) J. Adam, 

Acting Chief Secretary to Government. 


SCHEDULE of the Lands and Revenues ceded in 'perpetuity by His 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Beliauder to the Honorable East 
India Company , by virtue of the seventh Article of the annexed 
Treaty , amounting to thirty four lakhs of Rupees , lands and revenues, 
to be made over immediately. 

The Districts of Bailapoor, Autgong and Culleaun, and all the terri¬ 
tories possessed by Iiis Highness Rao Pandit Purdhan Behander 
situated to the north of those districts as far as Guzerat, and lying 
between the Ghauts of the Syadree mountains and the sea. 

All the rights and territories possessed by His Highness Rao Pundit 
Purdhan Beliauder in Guzerat, with the exception of Ahmedabad, 
Oolpar and the annual payment due by the Guickwar. 

The tribute of Kattiwar estimated, .after deducting the expense of 
collections, at four lakhs of Rupees. 

The territories of Darwar and Koosigul. 

The above territories are to be made oyer immediately. The neces¬ 
sary expenses of the management of the said districts are then to be 
ascertained and deducted from the gross revenue. The remaining 
revenue is to form part of the thirty-four lakhs stipulated for in the 
seventh Article, and the territory required to complete that amount is 
to be ceded in the Carnatic in such situations as may be most 
convenient to the Honorable East India Company’s Government, with 
a view to the preservation of a distinct boundary line. 

Whatever collections may have been made by the Officers of His 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan Beliauder from the districts to be made 
over immediately, or from those to be hereafter assigned in the Carnatic 
subsequent to the commencement of the present Hindoo year, answer¬ 
ing to the 5th of June 1817, are to be repaid to the Officers of the 
Honorable East India Company, agreeably to the ninth Article of the 
Treaty. 



niE 

SHWA. 

rxvr 


88 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of the revenue of the 
territories now made over, it is agreed that the regular accounts for 
the last twenty years shall be produced from the records ol IIis 
Highness Rao Pundit Purdhan’s Government, within the period of 
five days. 

(Peishwa’s Signature.) 


(Signed) Hastings. 

„ N. B. Edmonstomje. 

„ A. Seton. 

„ G. Dowdeswell. 

By the Governor-General in Council, this 5th day of July 1817. 

(Signed) J. Adam, 

Acting Chief Secretary to Government. 


Governor-Gene¬ 
ral’s small 
Seal. 



Paper presented by the Resident at Poona to the Peishwa’s Ministers on 
the Qth of July 1812, and accepted by His Highness o?i the 7 th. 

First —His Highness the Peishwa will take no notice of past 
injuries, and will advance no pecuniary claims without the consent 
of the British Government. 

Second .—The jaghiredars to retain possession of their scrinjaumy 
lands as long as they serve His Highness the Peishwa with fidelity. 

Third .—All lands and revenues which have been usurped, i c, 9 
enjoyed without Sunnuds, by the jaghiredars, to be restored to Ilia 
Highness the Peishwa. 

Fourth .—The jaghiredars' to serve His Highness the Peishwa 
according to their Tynaut Zaubitas, and to attend with their contin¬ 
gents when summoned by His Highness. The Peishwa will not give 
any promise to the jaghiredars that shall limit his ancient right to 
summon them when he pleases and retain them as long as he thinks 
fit, but he promises the British Government to employ them when 
the affairs of his Government require it, and to dismiss them according 

o 



90 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS 

IE 

awA. 
mT 

First .— That he shall resign for himself and successors all right, 
title, and claim over the Government of Poona or to any sovereign 
power whatever. 

Second .— That Bajee Rao shall immediately come with his family and 
a small number of his adherents and attendants to the camp of Briga¬ 
dier-General Malcolm, where he shall be received with honor and 
respect, and escorted safe to the city of Benares, or any other sacred 
place in Hindostan, that the Governor-General may, at his request, fix 
for his residence. 

Third .—On account of the peace of the Deccan, and the advanced 
state of the season, Bajee Rao must proceed to Hindostan without one 
day’s delay, but Brigadier-General Malcolm engages that any part of 
his family that may be left behind shall he sent to him as early as 
possible, and every facility given to render their journey speedy and 
convenient. 

Fourth .—That Bajee Rao shall, on his voluntarily agreeing to this 
arrangement, receive a liberal pension from the Company’s Government 
for the support of himself and family. The amount of his pension will be 
fixed by the Governor-General. Brigadier-General Malcolm takes 
upon himself to engage that it shall not be less than eight lakhs of 
Rupees per annum. 

Fifth.—It Bajee Rao, by a complete and ready fulfilment of this 
Agreement, shows that he reposes entire confidence in the British 
Government, his requests in favor of principal jaghiredars and old 
adherents, who have been ruined by their attachment to him, will 
meet with liberal attention; his representations also in favor of 
Brahmins of venerable character, and of religious establishments 
founded or supported by his family, will be treated with regard. 

Sixth .—The above propositions must not only be accepted by Bajee 
Rao, but he must personally come into Brigadier-General Malcolm’s 
camp within twenty-four hours of this period, or else hostilities will be 
recommenced, and no further negociation will be entered into with him. 

(True copy.) 

(Signed) A. MacDonald, 

Assistant. 


Ro. XVI. 


Propositions to Bajee Rao. 


Dated ls£ June 1818 . 



Treaties, engagements, and sunnuds. 


89 


to the ancient usage by the advice of the British Government 1 

PEI 

•frhen their services are not required. His Highness also en^a^es —zr 
to treat the jaghiredars with the consideration to which they are 
entitled by former practice. 

Fifth .—The British Government charges itself with the fulfilment 
of the conditions contained in the four Articles above written. If the 
jaghiredars shall not accept them, the English Government will enforce 
them by fair means or by force if necessary, and if they should finally 
ieject them, the British Government will unite with the Peishwa in 
resuming their lands for His Highness. Should the jaghiredars give 
their consent to these Engagements at present, but hereafter refuse to 
comply with them, the British Government will join with the Peishwa 
in punishing them. 

Sixth .—The Peisluva’s Government will not depart from any of the 
Engagements into which the British Government may enter in con¬ 
formity to the preceding Articles, nor is any other authority to inter¬ 
fere with the British Government in the present negociation. 


(Peishwa’s Signature.) 


Hastings. 

N. B. Edmonstone. 
A. Seton. 

G. Dowdeswell. 

By the Governor-General in Council, the 5th day of July 1817. 

(Signed) J. Adams, 
Acting Chief Secretary to Government 


\ 

\ 




PART II. 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNDDS 

RELATING TO 

N A G- P 0 11 E . 


The early history of the Nagpore family is somewhat obscure, but 
its importance in Indian history may be said to date from Raghojee, 
who, as a leader of predatory expeditions, had, at the time of his death 
in 1755, established the Mahratta supremacy over the country between 
the Nerbudda and the Godavery, from the Adjuntah hills eastward to 
the sea. Raghojee left four sons, Janojee, Sabajee, Madhojee, and 
Beembajee, and was succeeded by Janojee, the eldest, who died in 
1772, after having, with the concurrence of the Peishwa, adopted his 
nephew Raghojee, son of Madhojee, as his heir. The Government, 
however, was, on Janojec’s death, seized by Sabajee, who held it through 
much opposition till 1775, when he was slain in battle by his brother, 
and was succeeded by Raghojee, a minor, under the regency of 
Madhojee. 

Advances had been made by the Bengal Government during the 
reign of Janojee with a view to obtain Cuttack, but without success. 
An unsuccessful attempt was also made by Warren Hastings to rent 
a tract of country on the Cuttack coast from Madhojee. In 1779 
Madhojee sent ar force to invade Bengal in pursuance of a con¬ 
federacy between the Mahrattas, the Nizam, and Hyder Ali, for the 
overthrow of the British power. Madhojee was at heart friendly to 
the British Government, and being disgusted at the refusal of the 



92 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

ORE. Peishwa to admit his claims to Gurrah Mundla, he undertook this 
expedition with much reluctance. The British Government who had 
dispatched a force to the Carnatic by the coast route, under Colonel 
Pearse, to co-operate with the Madras army against Ilyder AH, 
found therefore little difficulty in concluding a Treaty (No. XVII.) 
on 6th April 1781, by which the army of Madhojee was bought off 
from its invasion of Orissa, and a promise was obtained from him of 
assistance against Hyder Ali. 

On the death of Madhojee in 1788, the uncontrolled power devolved 
on Raghojee, who was then twenty-eight years of age. When the triple 
alliance was formed between the British Government, the Nizam, and 
the Peishwa*for the overthrow of Tippoo Sultan, negociations were 
opened with a view to include Raghojee in the confederacy, but 
Seringapatam fell before they were brought to a close. Raghojee was 
too jealous of the increased ascendancy acquired by the British Go¬ 
vernment on the fall of Tippoo, to be induced to enter into an alliance 
to check the growing power of Scindia. He even exerted his influ¬ 
ence, although without success, to put a stop to the contest between 
Scindia and Holkar with a view to a union against the English ; and 
* after the Treaty of Bassein he joined Scindia in the war which was 
begun to defeat the objects of that Treaty. The power of Scindia and 
Raghojee in the Deccan was broken in the battles of Assaye and 
Argaum. The ruin of Raghojee was completed by the fall of 
Gawilghur, and, on 17th December 1803, he signed the Treaty of 
Deogaum (No. XVIII.) By this Treaty the Rajah was stripped of 
the Province of Cuttack and of the country to the west of the 
Wurda and south of the Nernulla and Gawilgurh hills. This Treaty 
was confirmed by the' Treaty of 1804 with the Peishwa. Its effect 
was to reduce the revenues of the Berar State from about one crore 
of Rupees to sixty lakhs. 

In 1806 the territory of Sumbulpore and Patna was restored 
(No. XIX.) to the Rajah gratuitously, in consideration of the great loss 
to which the Rajah had been subjected by the transfer of the tribute 
and allegiance of the Chiefs of those districts to the British Govern¬ 
ment. But the Rajah steadily rejected repeated advances towards 
closer relations, and resisted all efforts made to induce him to subsidize 
a British force. 

Raghojee died in 1816, and was succeeded by his only son Pursojee. 
This Piince being incapacitated for Government by a complication 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


93 


of diseases, a regency was formed under Madhojee Bhonsla, better 
known as Appa Saliib, Pursojee’s cousin. Appa Sabib, however, 
was by no means secure in power, and to strengthen himself he 
ncgociated a Treaty (No. NX.) with the British Government in May 
1816, by which the Rajah agreed to subsidize a British force, costing 
Rupees 7,50,000 a year, and to maintain a force of not less than 3,000 
cavalry and 2,000 infantry, with the necessary equipments of guns 
and warlike stores. 

In 1817 Pursojee died suddenly, having been murdered, as was 
afterwards discovered, by Appa Sahib. Soon after his accession, Appa 
Sahib made common cause with the Peishwa, who was then inciting 
all the Mahrattas to unite against the English. lie fell upon the 
Residency with an overwhelming force, but was gallantly repulsed, 
and compelled on 6th January 1818 to sign a Provisional Agreement 
(No. XXI.), ceding lands in lieu of the subsidy and contingent, and 
engaging that the Government of the country should be conducted 
according to the advice of the Resident. Appa Sahib, however, 
persevered in his intrigues against the British Government. He 
was arrested, but effected his escape, and found refuge among the 
Gonds. After an unsuccessful attempt to regain Ills hold of Nagpore, 
he fled to Ilindostan in February 1819. lie died at Jodhpore in 1840. 

On the deposition of Appa Sahib, a grandson .of Raghojee by his 
daughter was placed in power on 26th June 1818. He assumed the 
name of Raghojee in honor of his grandfather. During the minority 
of the new Rajah, the Nagpore territory was under the management 
of the Resident, acting in the name of the Rajah. In 1826, when the 
Rajah attained his majority and w r as entrusted witli the administra¬ 
tion, a Treaty (No. XXII.) was made with him, by which he ceded 
for ever territories to pay the cost of the subsidiary force, and assigned 
lands as a guarantee for the payment of the troops which he was 
bound to maintain, and which were thenceforth to be under control of 
the British Government. The Rajah also bound himself to maintain 
good government under control of the Resident. The provisions of this 
Treaty however were acknowledged to press heavily on the Rajah’s 
resources, and to be inconsistent with the declared wish and resolution 
of Government to restore the Bhonsla family to the rank and station 
of one of the substantive powers of India. In 1829 therefore the 
Treaty was modified (No. XXIII.), the assigned districts were restored 



94 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


•ORE. to Nagpore, a subsidy of eight lakhs a year was taken instead, tlic 
auxiliary force was disbanded, and the Rajah was required to keep up 
a national force of his own sufficient to preserve the internal tranquillity 
of the country. The Rajah was at the same time released to some 
extent from his complete subjection to the Resident in the administra¬ 
tion of affairs. At the request of the Rajah, in 1830, the 6th Article 
of the Treaty of 1826, the utility of retaining which was not very 
apparent, was cancelled. 

Raghojee retained the administration of affairs till the day of his 
death, 11th December 1853. He died without a son, without any 
heir whatever, and without any adopted child, and it was determined 
to incorporate with the British Territories the Nagpore State, which 
had in 1818 been forfeited by the treachery and hostility of Appa 
Sahib, had been declared to belong to the British Government by 
right of conquest, had been conferred by free gift on Raghojee, his 
heirs and successors by the Treaty of 1826, and had now lapsed to the 
British Government by default of heirs. 

In 1855 the surviving widows of the late Rajah adopted as their 
son and heir, Janojee Blionsla, a collateral relation of the Rajah in the 
female line. In consideration of the loyalty of the family during the 
rebellion of 1857, the title of Rajah Bahadoor of Deor, and the lands 
of Deor, in the District of Sattara, were conferred in perpetuity on 
Janojee and his heirs, whether by blood or by adoption. The family 
receive pensions amounting at present to Rupees 2,33,000 a year. 

By Article 2 of the Treaty of 1826, the Engagements formed with 
the Gond and other tributary chiefs and zemindars by British Officers 
in the Rajah’s name were guaranteed. The zemindars with whom 
written Engagements (No. XXIY.) were contracted were those of 
Chutesgurh, Chanda, and Deogurh or Chindwara. The Chutesgurh 
zemindars, including the Rajah of Bustar, with whom a separate Treaty 
(No. XXY.) had been concluded, and the Rajahs of Kharonde and 
Kakair, were twenty-seven in number, and paid an annual tribute of 
Rupees 1,28,032. In Chanda there were eighteen petty Gond zemin¬ 
dars, paying altogether a tribute of only Rupees 420. . The Gond 
zemindars of Deogurh were fourteen in number, who usually paid only 
a trifling quit-rent. Besides these there were thirty-two zemindars in 
the Wyne Gunga districts, who paid a total tribute of Rupees 1,41,594, 
but with whom no.written Engagements were formed. 



06 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 

’ORE, assist the Rajah in the above-mentioned expedition, and having 
:vn - reduced Gurrah Mundelah, establish immediately the Rajah’s garrisons 
there. 

3rd. —That in order that the friendship betwixt the family of Maha- 
' rajah Madajee Boosla and the English may daily be strengthened 
and augmented* let the Governor-General and Council for the present 
send a trusty person to Nagpore, and hereafter the Dewan Deogur 
Pundit will come from that place and have an interview with the 
Governor-General* when* with their mutual advice and appiobation* 
the desires and demands of both parties will be adjusted and settled. 

4th. —That if it should happen from particular circumstances that 
an interview betwixt Deogur Pundit and the Governor-General 
cannot take place* in that case the desires and demands of both parties 
may be settled at ISTagpore by the intervention of a trusty person* and 
the bonds of friendship shall be so firmly established betwixt the 
family of Bhosilah and the English that no infraction or injury can 
ever by any means happen to them. 

Account of the monthly expense of the Troops to he sent along with 

Colonel Pearse. 

Two thousand sowars or horse* at 50*000 Rupees per month for 
each 1*000* making altogether 1 lakh of Rupees per month. 

Dated 8th Rubbee-ul-Sani , in the 22 nd year of the Reign . 

The said allowance shall commence from the time of the troops 
leaving Cuttack* and when they shall have finished the service* and 
having received their dismissal from the Commander of the English 
troops* they shall return to their own country* their pay shall be con¬ 
tinued according to the number of munzils or days’ journeys which 
they may be from the place of their dismission to the city of Cuttack. 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNT7DS. 95 

The Nagpore territory and the Saugor and Nerbudda territory ^AG 
have been formed into a separate administration under a Chief Com- No * 
missioner, to which have been added Sumbulpore and its dependencies. 

The territories under the jurisdiction of the Chief Commissioner are 
now known as the Central Provinces. 

The Principal Chiefs in the Central Provinces are the Rajahs of 
Bustar, Kharond, and Mukrai, to all of whom the right of adoption 
has been conceded (No. XXVI). The Rajah of Bustar pays an 
annual tribute of Rupees 4,000. The Kharond Chief pays Rupees. 
4,500. The revenues of Bustar and Kharond are respectively Rupees 
25,870 and Rupees 29,878, and the population about 80,000 in each 
Slate. 


No. XVII. 

Treaty with the Rajah of Berar in 1781. 

Whereas a friendship is firmly established betwixt Maharajah 
Madajee Boosla and the English, the following Articles are accord¬ 
ingly settled by Syna Bahadur through Rajah Ram Pundit. 

1st —That Rajah Syna Bahadur shall send 2,000 good and effective 
horse along with Colonel Pearse to assist the English in the war 
against Hyder Naig; that the Officer commanding them shall act 
under the order of the said Colonel, or the Officer who shall command 
the Bengal troops in the Carnatic; and that they shall receive from 
the Officer who shall command the Bengal troops in the Carnatic an 
allowance for their support at the rate which hath been settled in 
a separate paper by the Governor-General and Council and Rajah 
Ram Pundit, month by month, in the same proportion as the English 
troops shall receive their pay. 

2nd .—That the army of Rajah Syna Bahadur will immediately 
leave Orissa, and march in an expedition against Gurrah Mundelali; 
let the Governor-General and Council of the English, from a regard 
to the friendship which subsists betwixt the family of Bhosilah and 
the English, give orders that an English Officer with a body of the 
troops, now stationed in Hindostan, may march from that quarter to 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNDDH. 

No. XYIII. 


97 


Nc 


Treaty of Peace between the Honorable English East India Company and tlieir 
Allies on the one part, and Senah Saheb Soubah Raghojee Bhoosla on the other, 
settled by Major-General Wellesley on the part of the Honorable Company 
and their Allies, and by Jeswunt Rao Ramchunder on the part of Senah 
Saheb Soubah Raghojee Bhoosla ,* who have each communicated to the other 
their full powers. 


Article L 

There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the Honor¬ 
able Company and their Allies on the one part, and the Senah Saheb 
Soubah Raghojee Bhoosla on the other. 

Article 2. 

Senah Saheb Soubah Raghojee Bhoosla cedes to the Honorable 
Company and their Allies, in perpetual sovereignty, the Province of 
Cuttack, including the Port and District of Balasore. 

Article 3. 

He likewise cedes to the Honorable Company and their Allies, 
in perpetual sovereignty, all the territories of which he has collected 
the revenues in participation with the Soubah of the Deccan, and 
those of which he may have possession which are to the westward of 
the River Wurdah, 


Article 4. 

It is agreed that the frontier of Senah Saheb Soubah towards the 
territories of His Highness the Soubah of the Deccan, shall be formed 
to the west by the River Wurdah from its issue from the Injardy Hills 
to its junction with the Godavery. 

The hills on which are the Forts of Nernallah and Gouelghur are 
to be in the possession of Senah Saheb Soubah, and everything south 
of those hills, and to the west of the River Wurdah, is to belong to the 
British Government and their Allies. 

Article 5. 

Districts amounting to four lakhs of Rupees per annum contiguous 
to, and to the south of the Forts of Nernallah and Gouelghur, are to be 
given over to Senah Saheb Soubah, Those districts are to be fixed 

VOL, III. n 



08 treaties, engagements, and sunnuds. 

|RE - upon by Major-General Wellesley and delivered over to Senah Saheb 
rlIL Soubah at tbe same time with the forts. 

Article 6. 

Senah Saheb Soubah, for himself, his heirs and successors, entirely re¬ 
nounces all claims of every description on the territories of the British 
Government and their Allies, ceded by the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Articles, 
and on all the territories of His Highness the Soubah of the Deccan. 

Article 7. 

The Honorable Company engage that they will mediate and arbitrate, 
according to the principles of justice, any disputes or differences that 
may now exist or may hereafter arise between the Honorable Com¬ 
pany’s Allies, Secunder Jah Bahadur, his heirs and successors, and 
Eao Pundit Purdhaun, his heirs and successors respectively, and 
Senah Saheb Soubah. 


Article 8. 

Senah Saheb Soubah engages never to take or retain in his service 
any Frenchmen, or the subject of any other European or American 
Power, the Government of which may be at war with the British 
Government, or any British subject, whether European or Indian, 
without the consent of the British Government. The Honorable 
Company engage on their part, that they will not give aid or coun¬ 
tenance to any discontented relations, Kajahs, Zemindars, or other 
subjects of Senah Saheb Soubah, who may fly from or rebel against 
his authority. ° 

Article 9. 

In order to secure and improve tbe relations of amity and peace 
hereby established between the Governments, it is agreed that accre¬ 
dited Ministers from each shall reside at the court of the other. 


Article 10. 


Certain Treaties have been made by tbe British Government 
with feudatories of Senah Saheb Soubah. These Treaties* are to be 


‘ it, * * Erea ^ es Cuttack Tributary Mehals 

the utmost reluctance to ratify this clause, am 
Hostilities that he consented to sign the lists. 


Y°l. !•> page 184. The Rajah manifested 
it was only under the threat of renewed 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


99 


confirmed. Lists of the persons with whom such Treaties have been ^A( 
made will be given to Senah Saheb Soubah, when this Treaty will Nc 
be ratified by His Excellency the Governor-General in Council 

Article 11. 

Senah Saheb Soubah hereby renounces for himself, his heirs, and 
successors, all adherence to the confederacy formed by him and Dowlufc 
Rao Scindia and other Mahratta Chiefs, to -attack the Honorable 
Company and their Allies. He engages not to assist those Chiefs 
if the war with them should still continue. 

Article 12. 

This Treaty of Peace is to be ratified by Senah Saheb Soubah 
within eight days from this time; and the ratification is to be deli¬ 
vered to Major-General Wellesley, at which time the orders for 
the cession of the ceded territories are to be delivered, and the 
troops are to withdraw. Major-General Wellesley engages that the 
Treaty shall be ratified by His Excellency the Most Noble the 
Governor-General in Council, and that the ratification shall be deli¬ 
vered in two months from this date. 

Done in Camp at Deoganm , this \*7th December 1803, answering 
to the 2nd Ramzan 1213 Fazali . 

Ratified by the Governor-General and Council on the 9th January 
1804. 


No. XIX. 

Translation of an Engagement for the restitution of the Provinces of Sumrui> 
pore and Patna by the British Government to Rajah Raghojee Bhooslah 
Saina Saheb Soobau Bahadoor, dated 24tli August 1806, corresponding with 
the 9th of Jemmaudee-Oossannee, 1221 Ilijree. 

Adverting to the relations of harmony and friendship subsisting 
between the British Government and Maharajah Raghojee Bhooslah, 
the Honorable Sir George Hilaro Barlow, Baronet, Governor-General, 
agrees to restore to Maharajah Raghojee Bhooslah all the territory 



100 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


xe. of Sumbulpore and Patna which was ceded by the Maharajah to tl c 
Honorable English Company, with the exception of the temtory o 
Rajah Joojar Sing, according to the following Schedule The Bi itish 
Government hereby renonnces all future clan* whasoever to he 
undermentioned Pergunnahs, and the Maharajah shall l^ sc * stl ' c 
same degree of sovereignty over them as he possesses over the icst ot 

his dominions. 


SCHEDULE. 

Names of Pergunnahs of Sumbuli?ore. 

Sumbulpore. 

Sonepoor. 

Saurungurh. 

Burgurh. 

Suktee. 

Serakole. 

Ben via. 

Bonee. 

Kautikpoor. 


Names of Pergunnahs of Patna. 

Patna. 

Khauss Patna. 

Nawagurh. 

Ghureeland. 

Tonageer. 

Borasambre. 

The territory of Rajah Joojar Sing shall continue to be incorporated 
with the British dominions. The Maharajah, on his part hereby 
renounces all future claim to the territory of Kajah Joojar Sing, 
and further engages never to make any pecuniary demand on that 
territory or to exercise any authority over it. If at any time. Rajah 
Joojar Sing, with a view to excite disturbance, shall either attack 
the country of Maharajah Raghojee Bhooslah or enter into any collu¬ 
sion with the zemindars of the Maharajahs territory for the 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


101 


purpose of making war upon the Maharajah* the Maharajah shall 
report the same to the Honorable the Governor-General in Council, 
who will duly enquire into the circumstances of the case, and if 
such acts should be proved against Rajah Joojar Sing, his country 
shall be separated from the British dominions, and the Maharajah 
shall be at liberty, with the consent of the British Government, 
to march his troops against the said Rajah Joojar Sing. The Governor- 
General will not in any manner encourage or afford him protection. 
On the other hand, the Maharajah and his officers shall not, without 
the consent of the British Government, make war in any manner upon 
Rajah Joojar Sing or offer any molestation to him. If, however, Rajah 
Joojar Sing shall be found guilty of any outrages, in that case Roygurh 
shall be separated from the Company’s dominions, and annexed to those 
of the Maharajah, in the same manner as Sumbulpore and Patna. 

It is hereby agreed that a copy of this Treaty, ratified by the 
Governor-General in Council, shall be transmitted from Fort William 
in the space of two months and eleven days from this date. 

Ratified by the Governor-General in Council on the 2nd October 

1806. 


No. XX. 

Treaty of perpetual defensive alliance between the IIonoratjle English East India 
Company and His Highness Maharajah Pursojee Bhooslah, his heirs and suc¬ 
cessors, settled with Rajah Moodhajee Bhooslah, exercising with plenary powers 
all the functions of Government, on behalf of the said Maharajah, by Richard 
Jenkins, Esq., Resident at the Court of His Highness, by virtue of the powers 
delegated to him by the Right Honorable Francis, Earl of Moira, k. g., one of 
His Britannic Majesty’s Most Honorable Privy Council, Governor-General in 
Council, appointed by the Honorable the Court of Directors of the said Honorable 
Company to direct and control all their affairs in the East Indies. 

V 

Whereas, by the blessing of God, the relations of peace and friend¬ 
ship have uninterruptedly subsisted for a length of time between the 
Honorable English East India Company and the State of Nagpore, 
the powers aforesaid, adverting to the complexion of the times, have 
determined, with a view to the preservation of peace and tranquillity. 


NAC 

“No 



102 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


>RE. and to the security of their rights and territories, and those of their 
x. allies and dependents, to enter into the defensive alliance on the 
terms specified in the underwritten Articles. 

Article 1. 

The peace, union, and friendship, so long subsisting between the 
two States, shall be promoted and increased by this Treaty, and 
shall be perpetual. The friends and enemies of either shall be the 
friends and enemies of both, and the contracting parties agree, that 
all the former Treaties and Agreements between the two States now 
in force, and not contrary to the tenor of this Engagement, shall 
be confirmed by it. 


Article 2. 

If any Power or State whatever shall commit any act of unprovoked 
hostility or aggression against Maharajah Pursojee Bhooslah, and, 
after due representation, shall refuse to enter into amicable explanation* 
or shall deny the just satisfaction or indemnity which the contracting 
parties shall have required, then the contracting parties will proceed 
to concert and prosecute such further measures as the case shall 
appear to demand. For the more distinct explanation of the true 
intent and effect of this Agreement, the Governor-General in Council* 
in behalf of the Honorable Company, hereby declares that the British 
Government will never permit any Power or State whatever, in which 
description is included the tribe of Pindarries, to commit with impuni¬ 
ty any act of unprovoked hostility or aggression against the rights 
and territories of Maharajah Pursojee Bhooslah, but will at all times 
maintain and defend the same in the same manner as the rights and ter¬ 
ritories of the Honorable Company are now maintained and defended. 

Article 3. 

In conformity to the spirit of complete alliance and indemnity of in¬ 
terests, established by the provisions of the preceding Articles, and in 
return for the obligation which the British Government has thereby 
imposed upon itself, to protect and defend the State of Nagpore against 
all enemies, the Maharajah agrees not only to employ the utmost effort 
of his military power and resources, in conjunction with those of tke 
British Government, for the purpose of assisting to repel acts of hostility 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


103 


or aggression directed against the State of Nagpore, but also to consi¬ 
der the forces and resources of his Government to be applicable to the 
utmost practicable extent on occasions on which the British Govern¬ 
ment may be engaged in operations for the defence of the territories of 
its allies, their Highnesses the Nawab Sekunder Jah, Soobahdar of the 
Deccan, and the Peishwa Rao Pundit Purdhaun, as well as generally 
to aid the British Government as far as his power and resources will 
admit, in any contest in which the British Government may at any 
time be engaged for the defence of its own rights and those of its 
allies. 


Article 4. 

With a view to fulfil this Treaty of defensive alliance. Maharajah 
Pursojee Bhooslah agrees to receive, and the Honorable East India 
Company to furnish, a permanent subsidiary force of British troops, 
consisting of not less than one regiment of Native cavalry, six batta¬ 
lions of Native infantry, one complete company of European artillery, 
and one company of pioneers with the usual proportion of field 
pieces attached, and with the proper equipment of warlike stores and 
ammunition, which force shall be accordingly stationed in perpetuity 
in the Maharajah’s territories. It is moreover agreed that, with the 
reserve of two battalions of sepoys which are to remain near His High¬ 
ness’ person, the residue of the force shall be posted in such a situation 
near the south bank of the Nerbudda as may be chosen by the 
British Government, and with liberty to move in any direction neces¬ 
sary through His Highness’ territories, as well as to have the privilege 
of changing its position in case it shall be so determined on, the 
Maharajah’s Government being previously consulted in the latter 
case. In the event, however, of its being deemed advisable by the 
British Government, at any time, that one of the two battalions of 
sepoys, which it is above provided are to remain near His Highness’ 
person, should join the force stationed near the Nerbudda, the said 
Maharajah will make no objection, but the force near His Highness’ 
person shall never consist of less than one battalion. 

Article 5. 

The Maharajah hereby engages to pay to the Honorable Company, 
from Ilis Highness’s treasury at Nagpore, according to the two 



>RE. 

xT" 


104 TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNTJDS. 

under-mentioned equal and half-yearly instalments, punctually and 
without demur or hesitation, the annual sum of seven lakhs and fifty 
thousand Nagpore Rupees of the present standard value, being the 
estimated additional charge of the field establishment of the force 
described in the preceding Article. 

The following are the instalments :— 

1st December ... ... ... ... 3,75,000 

1st June ... . 3,75,000 

Rupees 7,50,000 


Article 6. 

The contracting parties will hereafter take into consideration the 
expediency of commuting the pecuniary payment settled by the 5th 
Article for a cession of territory on the part of Maharajah Puraojeo 
Bhooslah, and whatever arrangement may be thus determined upon, by 
mutual consent, shall be adopted. In the event likewise of any failure 
or delay ever occurring in the punctual discharge of the sum iu 
question, according to the instalments above specified, the British 
Government shall be entitled to require, and His Highness will 
without hesitation agree to cede, territory in lieu of the whole of tho 
subsidy, the situation of which territory will be then fixed according 
to mutual convenience. But it is understood that the British Govern¬ 
ment claims no right to demand a cession of territory, as long as the 
pecuniary payments are punctually discharged. 

Article 7. 

Whenever it may be found expedient for any temporary pur¬ 
pose to employ within the Maharajah’s territory any troops be¬ 
longing to the Honorable Company, exceeding the amount of the 
subsidiary force as fixed by the 4th Article, no objection shall be 
made on the part of the Maharajah, and the British Government on 
its part engages that the Maharajah shall not be charged with any 
additional expense on account of such extra troops. 

Article 8. 

The Maharajah grants full permission for the purchase of supplies of 
every description for the use of the subsidiary force in all parts of Hia 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNN CDS. 


105 


Highness’ territory. Grain and all other articles of consumption, and J*a 
provisions, and all sorts of materials for wearing apparel, together N 
with the necessary number of cattle, horses, and camels, required 
for the use of the subsidiary force, shall be entirely exempted from 
duties, and the Commanding Officer and Officers of the said subsidiary 
force shall be treated in all respects in a manner suitable to the 
dignity and greatness of both States. The subsidiary force will at all 
times be ready to execute services of importance, such as the protec¬ 
tion of the person of the Maharajah, his heirs and successors, the over¬ 
awing and chastisement of rebels, or exciters of disturbance in Ilis 
Highness’ dominions, and due correction of his subjects or depend¬ 
ents, who may withhold payment of the Sirkar’s just claims, but it 
is not to be employed on trifling occasions, nor like Scbundy to 
be stationed in the country to collect the revenues, nor in levying 
contributions in the manner of Moolukgeeree. 

Article 9. 

Inasmuch as by the present Treaty the British Government engages 
to maintain and defend the rights and territories of Maharajah Pursojee 
Bhooslah in the same manner as the rights and territories of the 
Honorable Company are now maintained and defended, and as the 
object of the present alliance is purely and exclusively of a defensive 
nature, the Maharajah consequently engages never to commit any 
act of hostility or aggression against their Highnesses the Nizam 
and the Peishwa, or any of the Honorable Company’s allies or depend¬ 
ents, or against any other power or State whatever, and in the event 
of differences arising, whatever adjustment the Company’s Govern¬ 
ment, weighing matters in the scale of truth of justice, may deter¬ 
mine, shall meet with full approbation and acquiescence. 

Article 10. 

As by the present Treaty the union and friendship of the two 
States is so firmly cemented that they may be considered as one and 
the same, the Maharajah engages neither to commence nor to pursue 
in future any negotiations with any other State whatever, without 
giving previous notice to, and entering into mutual consultation with, 
the Company’s Government; and the British Government on its part 
hereby declares, that it has no manner of concern with any of the 

VOL. hi. o 



16G 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNl-DS* 


)RE - Maharajah’s children, relations, dependents, subjects, or servants, with 
respect to whom the Maharajah is absolute. 

Article 11. 

Whereas it is incumbent on the Maharajah to be prepared to unite 
with the British Government to the utmost extent of his power and 
resources in the protection and defence of his rights and territories, 
against all external and internal enemies, and whereas by the 3rd 
Article of this Treaty, the Maharajah engages not only to fulfil 
that obligation, but also to assist the British Government as far 
as may be practicable on occasions on which that Government may 
be compelled to exert its power in the defence of its own rights 
and those of its allies, the Maharajah engages, with a view to fulfil 
these obligations, to maintain, at all times, in a state of efficiency, 
and fit for active service, a force consisting of not less than three 
thousand cavalry, and two thousand infantry, with the necessary 
equipments of guns and warlike stores ; which force shall be em¬ 
ployed on occasions of actual service in the manner that may be pointed 
out by the Officer Commanding the British subsidiary force. In the 
same manner, in the event of any part of the forces‘of the Maharajah 
being required to act in conjunction with a British force beyond the 
limits of His Highness’ territories, the former shall be employed under 
the orders and directions of the Commanding Officer of the latter. It 
is, moreover, declared that, in addition to the force of cavalry and 
infantry which the Maharajah is bound by this Article perpetually to 
maintain, His Highness will keep up as large a number of troops 
as may be necessary, and as the resources of his Government may 
enable him to support, and that on all necessary occasions, ho will he 
ready to assist the British Government with the whole of his forces. 

Article 12, 

Maharajah Pursojee Bhooslah agrees to attend and conform to 
whatever advice and recommendation may from time to time be offered 
by the British Resident at His Highness’ Court on all points connected 
with the due support and equipment of the force consisting of three 
thousand cavalry and two thousand infantry, which, by the 11th Article, 
the Maharajah engages permanently to maintain, which advice and 
recommendation will extend to the regularity and sufficiency of the 



TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SUNNUDS. 


107 


pay and good quality of the accoutrements, horses, arms. Sec*, of the 
troops composing the said force, and to the general discipline of the 
whole. His Highness further agrees to afford without excuse or hesita¬ 
tion to the Resident any evidence that he may at any time require of 
the actual existence of the force in question in a state of efficiency for 
active service; and whenever the Resident may require it. His Iligh- 
nes will permits the said force to be mustered, inspected, and review¬ 
ed personally, either by the Resident or by the Officer commanding the 
subsidiary force. 


Article 13. 

Inasmuch as by the present Treaty of defensive alliance, the ties of 
union are so closely drawn that the interests of the two States are 
become identified, it is agreed that on occasions on which it may be 
deemed expedient and necessary for the general defence of the Deccan, 
or for the suppression of disorders, the British subsidiary force 
serving with the Maharajah shall be permitted, at the direction of 
the British Government, to be employed in the Province of Berar, 
in co-opei'ation with the subsidiary force of Hyderabad, and also in 
other territories adjacent to the Maharajah’s dominions; provided, 
however, that by such temporary employment of the force stationed 
with the Maharajah, His Highness’ territories shall not be exposed 
to serious danger, and that tlm force stationed near His Highness-’ 
person shall never be less than one battalion of sepoys. 

Article 14. 

The British Government agrees not to give aid or countenance 
to any discontented subjects or dependents of the Maharajah, or 
any members of His Highness’ family, or relations or servants of 
His Highness, who, in like manner, engages to refuse protection to 
any persons who may be in a state of rebellion against the British 
Government or its allies, or to any fugitives from their respective 
territories. 


Article 15. 

This Treaty, consisting of fifteen Articles, being this day settled 
by Richard Jenkins, Esquire, with Rajah Moodhojee Bhooslah, 
on the part of Maharajah Pursojee Bhooslah, Mr. Jenkins has 



