HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION OF TANZANIA PAPER No. 4 


ee UNE “a 
Aone 


ROW 


edited by 
G. C. K. GWASSA and JOHN ILIFFE 


The design of the~front cover is based on a 
photograph of the chiefs of southern Ungoni, 
taken shortly before the rising. 
From left to right they are: 

Nduna Mpambalyoto 

Nduna Songea Mbano 

Nduna Chabruma bin Hawayi 


Nduna Msimanimoto 

Nkosi Mputa Gama 
The execution of Mpambalyoto, Msimanimoto, 
and Mputa is described on pages 25 and 26. 
Songea was executed separately. Chabruma was 
not executed. The photograph is reproduced by 
permission of Tanzania Information Services 
‘and Mr. M. S. Haule. 


Records of the 
MAJI MAJlI Rising 


PART ONE 


HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION OF TANZANIA PAPER No. 4 


Records of the 
MAJI MAI 
Rising 


PART ONE 


edited by 
G. C. K. GWASSA and JOHN ILIFFE 
The University College 


Dar es Salaam 


EAST AFRICAN PUBLISHING HOUSE 


© G.C.K. GWASSA, JOHN ILIFFE and copyright holders in the 
original documents 


The publication of a pamphlet by the Historical Association of 
Tanzania does not necessarily imply the Association’ s official 


approval of the opinions expressed therein 


PREFACE Bay 


The Maji Maji Rising of 1905-07 is the national epic of 
Tanzania. In this pamphlet, we have collected together 
documents which illustrate its history. The sections in 
ordinary type are the original documents, mostly transla- 
tions; the sections in italic type are our explanations and 
comments. 


We have deliberately chosen the documents from as wide 
a range of sources as possible, in order to show the variety 
of evidence available. About half the documents are oral 
accounts recorded by Mr. Gwassa during 1966-67, mostly 
in Matumbi. The remainder are official documents, letters, 
mission chronicles, oral information collected by other stud- 
ents, and various personal observations. The documents are 
chosen and arranged to illustrate the story of Maji Maji as 
we at present understand it. However, much more remains 
to be learned, and we hope to publish further collections of 
documents as research makes them available. A Swahili 
version of this first collection will be published as soon as 
possible. 


We wish to thank those who have made material available 
to us and helped us in other ways: the Director of the Tan- 
zania National Archives, Dar es Salaam; the Director of the 
Deutsches Zentralarchiv, Potsdam; the Archivist of the 
United Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, London; 
the Abbot-Bishop of Peramiho; the Father Superior of 
Kwiro Parish; the Manager, Oxford University Press (East- 
ern Africa); Dr. Alison Redmayne; Fr. Gerold Rupper, 0.s.8.; 
Fr. Lambert Doerr, 0.s.B.; the Principal and Research Com- 
mittee of the University College, Dar es Salaam, who financ- 
ed Mr. Gwassa’s fieldwork; Professor T. O. Ranger; Mr. J. S. 
Saul; Mr. M. S. Haule; the officers of the regional administra- 
tion in southern Tanzania; and the many Tanzanian elders 
whose knowledge of the rising, so generously shared, forms 
the core of this pamphlet. 


Dar es Salaam G. C. K. Gwassa 
December, 1967 John Iliffe 


RECORDS OF THE MAJI MAJI RISING 


Part One 


Our news is this, that the Germans treat us badly and 
oppress us much, because it is their will.+ 


So wrote an eighteen-year-old schoolgirl from Chiwata 
in southern Tanzania in 1898. Thirteen years before, German 
adventurers had claimed a protectorate in East Africa. They 
had fought their way inland along the caravan routes, estab- 
lishing garrisons of askari at key points, recognising or 
deposing tribal leaders, and creating an administration of 
subordinate staff called akidas and jumbes. By the late 
1890s Tanzania was an occupied country: 


Here at Chiwata there is a court every Wednesday, and 
many people are beaten and some are imprisoned by order 
of the German Government. But we, who have for so long 
been used to govern ourselves, find the laws of these Germans 
very hard, especially the taxes, because we black people 
have no money, our wealth consists of millet, maize, oil, and 
groundnuts, etc. Here at Chiwata two houses have been 
built, one for the court and one for the prison.’ 


This was the situation throughout southern Tanzania at 
the turn of the century. In Matumbi, north-west of Kilwa, 
the Germans appointed an agent to rule. In 1897 he demanded 
that the Matumbi should pay him tax. They refused: 


Then when that European arrived he asked, “Why did 
you not answer the call by drum to pay tax?” And they 
said, “We do not owe you anything. We have no debt to you. 
If you as a stranger want to stay in this country, then you 
will have to ask us. Then we will ask of you an offering to 
propitiate the gods. You will offer something and we will 
propitiate the gods on your behalf; we will give you land 
and you will get a place to stay in. But it is not for us as 
hosts to give you the offering. That is quite impossible.”* 


3 


The Matumbi resisted and were defeated. Soon afterwards, 
the Germans began to seek profit from south-eastern Tan- 
zania by forcing the people to grow cash crops for export 
to Europe. A few German settlers established cotton planta- 
tions in Matumbi, while smaller plots were laid out by the 
jumbes and akidas. The Matumbi were forced to work in 
the fields, and their hatred grew: 


The cultivation of cotton was done by turns. Every village 
was allotted days on which to cultivate at Samanga Ndumbo 
and at the Jumbe’s plantation. One person came from each 
homestead, unless there were very many people. Thus you 
might be told to work for five or ten days at Samanga. So a 
person would go. Then after half the number of days another 
man came from home to relieve him. If the new man did not 
feel pity for him, the same person would stay on until he 
finished. It was also like this at the Jumbe’s. If you returned 
from Samanga then your turn at the Jumbe’s remained, or if 
you began at the Jumbe’s you waited for the turn at Samanga 
after you had finished. No woman went unless her husband 
ran away; then they would say she had hidden him. Then 
the woman would go. When in a village a former clan head 
[Mpindo] was seized to go to cultivate he would offer his 
slave in his stead. Then after arriving there you all suffered 
very greatly. Your back and your buttocks were whipped, 
and there was no rising up once you stooped to dig. The 
good thing about the Germans was that all people were the 
same before the whip. If a jumbe or akida made a mistake 
he received the whip as well. Thus there were people whose 
job was to clear the land of trees and undergrowth; others 
tilled the land; others would smooth the field and plant; 
another group would do the weeding and yet another the 
picking; and lastly others carried the bales of cotton to the 
coast beyond Kikanda for shipping. Thus we did not know 
where it was taken. Then if that European gave out some 
bakshishi to the akida or jumbe they kept it. We did 
not get anything. In addition, people suffered much from 
the cotton, which took three months [to ripen] and was 
picked in the fourth. Now digging and planting were in the 
months of Ntandatu and Nchimbi, and this was the time 
of very many wild pigs in this country. If you left the chas- 
ing of the pigs to the woman she could not manage well at 
night. In addition, they [the pigs] are very stubborn at that 
period and will not move even if you go within very close 
range. Only very few women can assist their husbands at 
night and these are the ones with very strong hearts. There 
were just as many birds, and if you did not have children 
it was necessary to help your wife drive away the birds, 
while at the same time you cleared a piece of land for the 


4 


second maize crop, because your wife would not have time. 
And during this very period they still wanted you to leave 
your home and go to Samanga or to work on the jumbe’s 
plantation. This was why people became furious and angry. 
The work was astonishingly hard and full of grave suffering, 
but its wages were the whip on one’s back and buttocks. 
And yet he [the German] still wanted us to pay him tax. 
Were we not human beings? And Wamatumbi, especially 
the Wawolo [highlanders], since the days of old, did not 
want to be troubled or ruled by any person. They were 
really fierce, ah! Given such grave suffering they thought 
it better for a man to die rather than live in such torment. 

Thus they hated the rule which was too cruel. It was not 
because of agriculture, not at all. If it had been good agricul- 
ture which had meaning and profit, who would have given 
himself up to die? Earlier they had made troubles as well, 
but when he began to cause us to cultivate cotton for him 
and to dig roads and so on, then people said, “This has now 
become an absolute ruler. Destroy him”. 


A settler named Steinhagen—Bwana Kinoo—owned the 
cotton plantation at Samanga. This is how the work was 
organised: 


During the cultivation there was much suffering. We, the 
labour conscripts, stayed in the front line cultivating. Then 
behind us was an overseer whose work it was to whip us. 
Behind the overseer there was a jumbe, and every jumbe 
stood behind his fifty men. Behind the line of jumbes stood 
Bwana Kinoo himself. Then, behold death there! And then 
as you till the land from beginning to end your footprints 
must not be seen save those of the jumbe. And that Selemani, 
the overseer, had a whip, and he was extremely cruel. His 
work was to whip the conscripts if they rose up or tried to 
rest, or if they left a trail of their footprints behind them. 
Ah, brothers, God is great—that we have lived like this is 
God’s Providence! And on the other side Bwana Kinoo had 
a bamboo stick. If the mer of a certain jumbe left their 
footprints behind them, that jumbe would be boxed on the 
ears and Kinoo would beat him with the bamboo stick using 
both hands, while at the same time Selemani lashed out 
at us labourers.® 


There were European planters in Matumbi, but elsewhere 
along the southern coast cash crops were grown on communal 
plots supervised by akidas and headmen. These plots were 
established between 1902 and 1905 by European-controlled 
district development committees called “Communes”. Two 


5 


officials of the Dar es Salaam Commune described how the 
plots were organised in Uzaramo: 


When and how were the village plots organised? 


Village plots were set up in each akida’s and headman’s 
area early in 1902 (September-October). Bushland was main- 
ly chosen. The people were consulted in choosing the post. 
Each headman made a plot for his area in the neighbourhood 
of his headquarters. The principle was that every 30-50 men 
were to cultivate 24 acres. ... Where possible, the advice 
of the natives was obtained as to the crop to be grown. So 
far as possible, one crop was to be grown on each plot, 
according to the type of soil. Some 2,000 acres were cleared 
and cultivated. The size varied from 2% to 35 acres; the 
average was about 123 acres. 

In 1903-04 it was ordered that each village plot should be 
extended by at least a quarter. The total area in that year 
came to 3,215 acres. Maize, millet, simsim, groundnuts, rice, 
chiroko, and coconut palms were grown during 1902-03. 
Cotton was added in 1903-04. 

No extension took place in 1904-05, but the cultivation of 
other crops was abandoned in favour of cotton. 


What was the labour situation and the supervision? 


... According to returns by the headmen, the number of 

able-bodied men amounted to: 

1902-03 ce. 25,000 men 

1903-04 ce. 26,000 men 

1904-05 c. 25,000 men 
During the last year, women and children had to be brought 
in to help, since the men frequently refused to work. 

In Herr von Geibler’s opinion, two days’ work a week, as 
proposed by the District Office order, was insufficient from 
the start; 50-100 per cent more had to be worked from the 
first. When cotton became a main crop, continuous work was 
sometimes necessary... . 

The akidas were relied upon to report on the condition of 
the plots, and they were also responsible for punishing those 
whom the headmen reported as refractory workers. There 
was no European control of this—who among the natives 
worked, and for how many days—although agricultural 
students (some of them children) were sent out, each with a 
note-book, to judge the condition of the plots and the work 
performed, and to report to the District Officer. Only once a 
year did a European visit the plots, to measure them out 
and select the land. No lists of workers were kept anywhere; 


6 


the profits were distributed only according to the total 
numbers. Work on most of the plots was flatly refused dur- 
ing 1904-05. The headmen complained that they no longer 
had the people in hand. The officials of the Commune believ- 
ed at the time that they could detect a state of ferment. 


Were refractory workers punished, and by whom? 


Last year (1904-05), following reports from the akidas and 
from Sergeant Holzhausen, who was sent to inspect the 
headmen, numerous headmen were punished by the District 
Office with imprisonment in chains or solitary confinement 
for totally neglecting their village plots as a result of the 
natives’ refusal to work. The last, in June, was headman 
Kibasila, who got one month in chains. 


What were the financial returns? 


1902-03: . . . Total receipts: Shs. 25,580... . 
Gives an average 
per headman: Shs. 47.75 
per worker: 35 cents. 
1903-04: .. . Very bad harvest as a result of drought.... 
Total receipts: Shs. 17,528 from 178 plots 
totalling 3,170 acres. 178 headmen and 26,186 
workers were engaged in production. Mode 
of distribution: 
% to workers 
+ to commune 
+ to headmen 
... The last payment to the headmen and people took place 
early in October 1903, following the distribution plan of 
1902-03. 
No subsequent distribution took place.® 


Forced cultivation of unprofitable cash crops was a wide- 
spread grievance in southern Tanzania, but it was not the 
only one. Each area had its own sufferings. The Matumbi, for 
example, hated the Arab akidas and the askari whom the 
Germans set over them: 


Another reason again had its origin in ruling, that was the 
second reason: the rule of Arabs which arose from the 
German Government when it ruled this country and brought 
Arab akidas. Since the days of old, Wamatumbi had refused 
to be ruled. Those Arabs had failed in the past to penetrate 
into this country, because they had been completely barred 
from coming to capture people to enslave them. But when 


7 


they got work as akidas they began to seize people and 
reduce them to slavery; in fact they practised complete fraud 
and extortion and tortured them unjustly. Thus there was one 
akida at Kibata, another akida at Chumo, another akida at 
Miteja, another akida at Kinjumbi, and one at Samanga. An 
African akida was the Yao at Kitambi’'s. And an akida of the 
tribe of the Bajuni, a person from Lamu, was there at Nga- 
rambi. Now all these oppressed the Wamatumbi very much 
because they now had their opportunity. Thus when the 
troubles of Maji Maji started they [the Wamatumbi] imme- 
diately joined, saying, “We had better join so that we can 
drive off those enemies in order that we may get happiness”.” 


There was every kind of suffering. The askari were a cala- 
mity. You carried a heavy load. He did: not assess your 
strength to carry the load. If it were too heavy for you you 
carried it until you died. Then when the askari was within 
distance he sent a bullet to the nearest jumbe. On receiving 
that bullet, the jumbe had to fetch a very beautiful woman 
and slaughter a chicken or goat for him. Without these things 
he would be in trouble. All people were barbarians to the 
askari. A small mistake would be punishable with twenty- 
five strokes.® 


Behind all these particular grievances lay the fact of alien 
rule: 


All these are words that buzz like bees. If you had experi- 
enced it, you would have known how grave it was. To be 
chained, to be shot with bullets in the crown of one’s head 
and in one’s chest, while in addition you carried loads as 
the great eye of heaven rose up! Alas, such was life, and 
those iron chains were many—he made them in his own 
country. Better remove such suffering; fight him off so that 
the loads are carried by the askari themselves.°® 


“Better remove such suffering’—but how was this to be 
done? The Germans had defeated every tribe that had resist- 
ed their invasion. The tribes were small and divided. They 
had no weapons to match the rifles of the German troops: 


They waited for a long period because they were afraid. 
How could one clan face the Germans alone and not be 
wiped out? There had to be many.’° 


It is true they were ruled for a very long time before they 
rose in arms against the Germans. The problem was how to 
beat him really well. Who would start? Thus they waited 
for a long time because there was no plan or knowledge. 
Truly his practices were bad. But while there were no 


8 


superior weapons should the people not fear? Everywhere 
elders were busy thinking, ‘What should we do?” 


The people waited and suffered, conscious of their disunity 
and the military strength of their rulers. Then, in the year 
1904, a prophet arose. His name was Kinjikitile. Near his 
home at Ngarambe there was a pool in a tributary of the 
River Rufiji. Kinjikitile was possessed by the spirit Hongo 
who dwelt in the pool: 


He was taken by an evil spirit one day in the morning at 
about nine o’clock. Everyone saw it, and his children and 
wives as well. They were basking outside when they saw 
him go on his belly, his hands stretched out before him. 
They tried to get hold of his legs and pull him but it was 
impossible, and he cried out that he did not want [to be 
pulled back] and that they were hurting him. Then he dis- 
appeared in the pool of water. He slept in there and his 
relatives slept by the pool overnight waiting for him. Those 
who knew how to swim dived down into the pool but they 
did not see anything. Then they said, “If he is dead we will 
see his body; if he has been taken by a beast or by a spirit 
of the waters we shall see him returned dead or alive.” So 
they waited, and the following morning, at about nine 
o’clock again, he emerged unhurt with his, flothes dry and 
as he had tucked them the previous day. After returning 
from there he began talking of prophetic matters. He said, 
“All dead ancestors will come back; they are at Bokero’s 
in Rufiji Ruhingo. No lion or leopard will eat men. We are 
all the Sayyid Said’s, the Sayyid’s alone.” The song ran: “We 
are the Sayyid’s family alone. Be it an Mpogoro, Mkichi, or 
Mmatumbi, we are all the Sayyid Said’s.” The lion was sheep, 
and the European was red earth or fish of the water. Let 
us beat him. And he caught two lions which he tethered 
with a creeper, and people danced Likinda before those two 
lions. They remained harmless. Then word of this new man 
spread afar.” 


Kinjikitile taught that Africans were one and that his 
medicine—the maji of the rising’s name—was stronger than 
European weapons. His teaching spread among the people 
living around the River Rufiji. It reached the Matumbi 
through a whispering campaign they called Njwiywila: 


Njwiywila meant secret communication such as at a secret 
meeting. At that time if you listened to Njwiywila you paid 
one pice. That was the meaning of Njwiywila. The message 
in Njwiywila was like this: “This year is a year of war, for 
there is a man at Ngarambe who has been possessed—he 


9 


by 


\w 


has Lilungu. Why? Because we are suffering like this and 
because... we are oppressed by the akidas. We work without 
payment. There is an expert at Ngarambe to help us. How? 
There is Jumbe Hongo!” This Njwiywila began at Kikobo 
amongst the Kichi, for they were very near Kinjikitile. It 
spread to Mwengei and Kipatimu and to Samanga. But the 
people of Samanga did not believe quickly. It spread quickly 
throughout Matumbi country and beyond. In the message 
of Njwiywila was also the information that those who went 
to Ngarambe would see their dead ancestors. Then people 
began going to Ngarambe to see for themselves.** 


Pilgrims began to flock to Ngarambe early in 1905. A 
German officer later described these pilgrimages. He was 
probably wrong to think they were engineered by a con- 
spiracy of chiefs: 


The chiefs of the Matumbi and Kichi Hills spread it among 
their people that a spirit, living in the form of a snake in the 
Pangani Rapids on the River Rufiji, had given a magic 
medicine to a medicine man living in Ngarambe who had 
assumed the title Bokero (intermediary between men and 
the spirit). The medicine would free those who possessed 
it from all agricultural cares. Further, it would confer pros- 
perity and health, would protect them from famine and 
sickness, and would especially protect the fields against 
devastation by wild pigs. It guaranteed a good harvest, so 
that in future people would no more need to perform wage 
labour for foreigners in order to obtain accustomed luxuries 
(cloth, beads, etc.). Finally—and here mention was made 
only of the warfare customary between natives—the medi- 
cine would also give invulnerability, acting in such a way 
that enemy bullets would fall from their targets like rain- 
drops from a greased body. It would strengthen women and 
children for the flight customary in wartime, with the asso- 
ciated hardships and privations, and protect them from being 
seized by the victorious attackers, who were accustomed to 
take women and children with them as booty. The medicine 
consisted of water, maize, and sorghum grains. The water 
was applied at Ngarambe by pouring it over the head and by 
drinking. It was also handed out in small bamboo stems, to 
be hung round the neck. The women were to set the grains 
in the fields they cultivated, in order to obtain a good harvest 
and keep away the wild pigs. The men were to put one of 
each sort into the powder of each shot, thus achieving 
accuracy of aim. 

The business appeared completely harmless, and was 
understood in a rather hazy way by the many people who 
made pilgrimage to the medicine man. In no way secretly, 


10 


but publicly and without ceremony, great crowds of people— 
some of as many as 300 adults were observed—made their 
way to the medicine man under the eyes of the Arabs, 
Indians, and coastal people who were all later to suffer.* 


The Matumbi recall the joy which Kinjikitile inspired. 
They also recall that the pilgrims danced likinda—a dance 
of war: 


It was like a wedding procession, I tell you! People were 
singing, dancing, and ululating throughout. When they 
arrived at Ngarambe they slept there and danced likinda, 
everyone in his own group. The following morning they 
received medicine and returned to their homes.*® 


From the beginning, Kinjikitile’s message promised aid 
against European rule. As the people flocked to Ngarambe, 
so the militancy of the movement grew. Finally, some time 
during 1905, Kinjikitile sent representatives through the 
surrounding country to mobilise and train the people. To 
Nandete, in Matumbi, he sent a man whose title was 
Mpokosi: 


The song of Mpokosi during likinda was in the Ngindo 
language. He used to take his fly-whisk and his calabash con- 
tainer for medicine, and he went around sprinkling them with 
medicine. It was like military drilling with muzzle-loaders, 
and under very strict discipline. Thus Mpokosi would say: 


“Attention!” 

“We are at attention.” 
“What are you carrying?” 
“We are carrying peas.” 
“Peas? Peas of what type?” 
“Creeping peas.” 
“Creeping?” 

“Creeping.” 


And so on as they marched, until Mpokosi ordered: 


“Attention!” 
“We are at attention.” 
“Turn towards Donde country [inland].” 


(The warriors turned.) 

“Turn towards the black water [the ocean].” 
(They obeyed.) 

“Destroy the red earth?” 

“Destroy!” 

“Destroy?” 

“Destroy!” 


And so on as they advanced as if to shoot. 


11 


During that time they were dressed in their military attire 
called Ngumbalyo. Further, each one was told where to go 
or the day to start drilling. Thus all gathered at Nandete 
for this type of likinda. The song was entirely in riddles. 
Thus the question “what are you carrying?” meant “what 
do you want to do?” The answer “we are carrying peas” 
meant “we are carrying bullets”, and they used peas in their 
guns during drilling. “Creeping peas” are those that creep, 
and it meant that they were marching to the battlefield. 
“Creeping, creeping”’—that was walking, that is military 
marching. “Destroy the red earth’—that meant tear the 
European apart or destroy him.*® 


And as they returned from Nampuru to their camp they 
sang many times, “Let us fight him today”. They sang the 
same song as they marched to the battlefield.” 


Kinjikitile prepared the people for war. He promised them 
protection against European weapons. He offered them 
leadership, organisation, unity. But he told them not to fight 
until he gave the order. By July 1905 no order had come, 
and the Matumbi were impatient: 


At Ngarambe he told them, “The Germans will leave. War 
will start from up-country towards the coast and from the 
coast into the hinterland. There will definitely be war. But 
for the time being go and work for him. If he orders you to 
cultivate cotton or to dig his road or to carry his load, do 
as he requires. Go and remain quiet. When I am ready I 
will declare the war.” Those elders returned home and kept 
quiet. They waited for a long time. Then the elders won- 
dered. “This mganga said he would declare war against the 
Germans. Why then is he delaying? When will the Euro- 
peans go? After all, we have already received the medicine 
and we are brave men. Why should we wait?” Then the 
Africans asked themselves, “How do we start the war? How 
do we make the Germans angry? Let us go and uproot their 
cotton so that war may rise.”* 


Only a few shoots of cotton were affected, not the whole 
field... . Ngulumbalyo Mandai and Lindimyo Machela up- 
rooted the first two shoots. Then Jumbe Mtemangani [of 
Nandete] sent a letter to Kibata through his wife Namchan- 
jama Niponde. She was to report to the akida. People of 
Nandete had refused to be sent by Mtemangani to Kibata. 
The people had returned home to prepare for war. We waited 
for the akida or his spies to come to Nandete. Then we were 
ready. War broke out.*® 


12 


They heard that cotton had been uprooted in Wolo 
[Nandete]. The Arab at Kibata told Jumbe Kapungu to send 
his wife to investigate the reports of cotton uprooting. Jumbe 
Kapungu refused, saying, “If you have heard they have up- 
rooted cotton you must realise that this is the beginning of 
war. So how can I send a woman to make enquiries?” ... 
So my grandfather [Kapungu] and my father left for Wolo 
accompanied by others. They went up to Mundi at Kulita’s. 
On seeing Kapungu, Kulita told him to hide himself, for if 
the Matumbi heard he was there they would slaughter him. 
At six in the evening the Matumbi called on Kulita and said, 
“We have heard that the red earth is here. Is this true?” 
Kulita denied it, saying, “I cannot support the red earth.” 
At the first cock Kulita escorted Kapungu and his men back 
to Kibata. But the Matumbi had caught wind that agents 
of the akida had come. So from Kipepele Hill onwards 
Kapungu was hotly pursued by the Matumbi. Near Mwando 
Hill Kapungu declared, “I cannot go on running like a 
woman. Here we will face them.” They fought for two hours 
until two in the afternoon. Kapungu’s slave Manyanya fell 
dead. Kapungu and his friends ran back into Kibata.”° 


There at Kibata they began to fight. They fought for a 
whole week. Then the Arab ran out of ammunition. His 
village was surrounded by warriors. Then those jumbes who 
had gone to rescue him arranged for his escape to Miteja and 
thence to Kilwa. Then they plundered the shops and all 
property. But Kinjikitile had told them not to plunder. That 
was their mistake.” 


It was the last week of July 1905, and the Matumbi were 
at war. The news spread rapidly among the people of the 
Rufiji Valley who had already heard Kinjikitile’s message. 
Early in August the people of Kichi, southern Uzaramo, 
western Uluguru, and Ungindo joined the war. Watching 
it spread, the German Chief Secretary thought he detected 
skilled military planning: 


The development of the movement was undoubtedly 
controlled in a logical manner by good strategists. Many 
suspect that discharged askari were behind it, while others 
point to an Arab as the leader. The Acting District Officer 
of Kilwa believes that headman Abdalla Kitambi, an Ngindo, 
is to be seen as the leading spirit. His residence is at Mtumbei, 
at the south-western foot of the Matumbi Hills, near Hopfer’s 
cotton plantation. I have been told that Abdalla was once 
an akida under Kilwa District Office and enjoyed great con- 
fidence there. Later, on grounds unknown to me, he was 
removed from his office as akida. At all events, he possesses 


13 


KILOSA 
e 


ZARAMO 


e 
KISANGIRE 


@IRINGA 
Ey Ir . 
MUHANGA aC eaKaRa 
MNGETA, Ms 


MERERA, ov 
LUGoDA® WS 
© 


é 
+ @MAHENGE 
% 
®o 


$ 
<2 


Z_PERAMIHO 
oe 


O “sONGEA at 
, CHIWATA 
CHITANGALI Hog 


180 (Miles 


WAMATUMBI__ HIGHLANDS 


KEY: 
= MAIN ROADS 
— DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
m=z MINOR ROADS 
RIVERS 


SCALE: 1 : 250,000 


an accurate knowledge of German administrative methods 
and of the availability and disposition of military and police 
resources in Kilwa and the other coastal stations. The system- 
atic manner in which the rising was planned and expanded 
over widely separated areas demonstrates how well the 
leaders knew the disproportion between the real physical 
resources of the administration and what it had been in the 
habit of demanding from the natives. In my opinion, the 
outbreak of the rising was made possible chiefly by the fact, 
which can no longer be doubted, that the more perceptive 
among the coloured peoples had seen through and correctly 
weighed the government’s bluff in holding whole tribes in 
check with a handful of men.” 


The Chief Secretary was probably mistaken. The peoples 
around the Rufiji seem to have joined because many were 
closely related to the Matumbi and shared many of their 
grievances and their religious beliefs. For example, the 
Zaramo believed that they must obey a spirit named Kolelo, 
a messenger of God. Many identified Kolelo with the spirit 
Hongo by whom Kinjikitile was possessed. First Kolelo, 
and then the God who had sent him, promised the Zaramo 
victory: 


In the year 1905... Kolelo also concerned himself with 
politics. He (ie. naturally the Zaramo who honour him) 
clearly decided that there were other needs to satisfy besides 
famine, and so the xenophobic movement of that year at 
first simply associated itself closely with Kolelo’s name. 
Kolelo had forbidden the further payment of taxes to the 
white foreigners; in mid July a great flood would come and 
destroy all whites and their followers. Later it was said that 
the earth would open and swallow them, that no bullets but 
only water would come from the soldiers’ guns, seven lions 
would come and destroy the enemy, “be not afraid, Kolelo 
spares his black children”. 

Soon, however, other voices intervened. Now it was not 
Kolelo who cared for his children, but God himself, who had 
previously sent Kolelo. Kolelo, however, had not adequately 
fulfilled his task, so that God himself now appeared. 

Clearly linked to this new situation was everything said 
at the time about the resurrection of the dead, since accord- 
ing to Zaramo conceptions only God himself, and not Kolelo, 
has unlimited power over life and death. It was later said 
that before the rising chief Kibasila of Kisangire, subsequent- 
ly the main ringleader in Uzaramo, was won for their cause 
by the discontented spirits in the Matumbi Hills by a sham 
resurrection. He was said to have first become fully convinc- 
ed of the rightness of the rebel cause when they showed 


16 


him a man who had seen a remarkable likeness to his dead 
father.?* 


The movement had begun in answer to the religious mes- 
sage of a prophet. The power of the maji—power over Euro- 
pean weapons—depended on religious faith. And as the 
movement expanded away from the Rufiji Valley during 
August and September, it was again carried by prophets. 
These men called themselves hongo, messengers. They carried 
maji which they administered to the people. They promised 
unity and invulnerability. They called on all black men 
to rise against European rule. Theirs’ was a revolutionary, 
or more accurately a millennial, message, a promise to rid 
the world of the evils of witchcraft and European rule. It is 
likely that the people of southern Tanzania had heard such 
millennial teachings before, but only as attacks on witch- 
craft. Now this religious tradition was mobilised against the 
Germans. It was a revolutionary message because established 
leaders who opposed it often found themselves swept aside 
by the force of popular belief. The following account of a- 
hongo comes from a remote area, Uvidunda. It is unsympa- 
thetic, but it shows very clearly the millennial character of 
the movement: 


In that year there arrived in the country a certain man, 
a great deceiver, called Hongo. ... Hongo asked the people 
whether they were prepared to sit down under the European 
order to pay the tax of three rupees every year and they 
answered that they could not help themselves, for how could 
they fight the Europeans with their guns when they them- 
selves had only spears. Hongo then explained his trouble- 
some teaching to them. He said that he was a son of God and 
that with his help they would be able to defeat the Europeans 
for he had a medicine which resisted the penetration of their 
bullets, and in fact they would not be able to fire at all as 
their bullets would turn into water.... 

‘All the Jumbes and old men went to Ngwira [the Vidunda 
chief] to tell him that a great witch doctor Hongo had come 
to free them from’ the yoke of the Europeans and they 
repeated Hongo’s words to him. But Ngwira was very angry 
when he heard these words for he realised that he was an 
impostor#seeking to destroy the country. Ngwira told them 
that he had travelled to Kilosa, Morogoro, he had seen the 
ocean, he had walked to Tanga, Dar es Salaam and Tabora 
and everywhere he had seen the strength of the Europeans. 
i Hongo must be driven right away before he could destroy 
the country.”“The D.C., Kilosa, was prepared to find them 
work so. that they would be able to get the money for their 
tax, and although it was certainly hard, no good would come 


17 


( 
Gre 
Ye 


of trying to fight the Europeans. 

’’ But the Jumbes and old men paid no attention to his wise 
words for they were bent on a course of folly and they went 
to the elders and relatives of Ngwira to persuade them that 
they must convince Ngwira of the wisdom of following 
Hongo. His relatives refused at first for they had been bought 
by the Europeans and received much money but eventually 
they, too, changed their minds” , 

4 Hongo appointed himself chief of the district4n Vidunda 
there was a certain Arab trader and Hongo ordered that he 
should be caught and beheaded as he was the servant of the 
Europeans. He was wounded but slipped from the hands of 
his enemies and ran away to Ngwira who hid him in his 
house and after a few days sent him secretly to Kilosa to 
give the news to the D.O. that the country was being per- 
verted by Hongo//Fren Hongo gave orders that every man 
must anoint himself with his Usinga medicine; anyone who 
refused was to be caught and killed. People began to fear 
that they would be called witches and all the people of 
Kidodi and the people of Jumbe Kulumzima went to Hongo 
to receive his medicine. When they had been anointed with 
it, he lay in the road and ordered that everyone should jump 
over him without touching him and if anyone touched him 
he should be killed. . .” 

Then Hongo expounded his taboos which were as follows:— 
No white magic or witchcraft was to be performed, no 
charms or medicines of any kind must be kept in their houses 
but all destroyed by fire. No meat was to be eaten unless 
it had been slaughtered by cutting the throat. If anyone 
wanted meat he was to go into the bush, catch rats and cut 
their throat. If it had not been cut at the throat it was unlaw- 
ful meat and must be thrown away. It was against the law to 
drink strong drink or beer of “kimela” because these drinks 
had the colour of blood. It was strictly forbidden to perform 
the marriage ceremony until the war was finished/fWhen a 
man met one of his friends his greeting must be “Pyuu, 
Pyuu”, and the friend must answer the same words. They 
must call Europeans not “Europeans” but “Warautumbuche- 
re” because their stomachs must be speared. Every man that 
had been anointed was to pay a present of three pence to 
Hong& Every man was to sew one pesa into the fold of his 
loincloth, for this would sharpen his intelligence, and to 
wear on his head a turban made from the leaves of a castor 
oil plant tied up with string, and two stalks of mtama, be- 
cause thus the Europeans would not be able to see him.... 
‘(When Hongo saw that his strength was increasing and 
that many people were following him, he gathered them to- 
gether to go and take Kilosa.*4/ 


18 


By the end of August the movement had spread south- 
wards into the Lukuledi Valley, westwards to the Mahenge 
Plateau and the valley of the Kilombero. Everywhere the 
millennial message was carried by hongoMWhen they arrived 
in Undamba in the Kilombero Valley, they met the opposi- 
tion of the local chief, Undole: 


Bwana Undole heard of the approaching war of Maji Majji 
while he was staying at Kumwembe village... . The war 
had already reached Mngeta, which was near Merera 
[Undole’s capital]. When the news was announced, Undole 
sent one of the elders to Mngeta to investigate. On arrival, 
the envoy luckily met the people who had brought the majji 
medicine. The natives of Mngeta had already taken the 
maji and wore small pieces of reed on their heads. They 
advised the visitor to take the maji as well. But the visitor 
wanted first to know what was the meaning of drinking the 
maji. They told him, “We drink this maji medicine so that 
European and local wars will not harm us. If by bad luck 
war comes, bullets and spears will not harm us. Bullets and 
spears will not penetrate our skins.” And they told him many 
more things in order to attract him. The man liked their 
news and wished to get the medicine. They told him, “If 
you. want the medicine you must pay two cents.” He paid 
the cents to those with the medicine, for that was what it 
cost. After he had drunk the medicine they tied small pieces 
of reed around his head and made him wear one cent and 
told him he could return home. “That is the sign of comrade- 
ship. When you reach home tell all the people that they must 
dress like you. Those who will not dress like this will be 
taken for Swahili and will be killed.” He bade his hosts 
farewell and returned to Merera. 

When he arrived home he explained to his master all that 
he had seen .... Further, he told him how the maji comrades 
had promised to visit his country. After Undole had been 
told the news, the following morning he called a meeting of 
all elders and courtiers and explained to them the conditions 
regarding the maji. When the heads of the country arrived 
he harangued them, saying, “I do not want to hear that in 
my country there are people who drink the maji. Further, 
I do not like to invite the maji carriers into my country. Maji 
Maji is a ‘sham medicine brought by the Ngindo from 
Mponda’s. And if you agree to drink the maji do not com- 
plain to me later, for neither I nor my children will agree 
to take this maji. Europeans do not want this nonsense.” .. . 

After they had finished their business in Mngeta, the 
waganga of the maji proceeded to Mzee Masalika at Mkaja. 
There they cheated people, including Masalika who was 
made to drink the maji of immortality [maji ya uzima]. His 


19 


“in 
" 


jo? 


x 


people also took the maji although Undole had tried very 
hard to prevent that. The waganga then left for Makuwa’s 
at Lugoda. ... He drank the maji as well.” 


” Few rulers were strong enough to resist the teaching, and 
many were anxious to follow it. The Ngoni chiefs, for ex- 
ample, joined early in September when the maji was brought 
to Songea by Ngindo hongo led by Omari Kinjala/Here, as a 
mission teacher explained, one problem was to bring Christ- 
ian converts into the movement: 


When I saw that it was not safe for me out in the open, 
I slept in the hut of an Ngoni who had not yet taken the 
medicine. I could not sleep, however, because the yells and 
“Saidi!” greetings of the Ngoni roused me from my sleep. A 
few even came into the hut, but they were friends of mine 
who were fond of me. They had taken the medicine already 
and urged me to go there as well. “If you go there,” they 
said, “no harm will come to you. If you do not, you will be 
killed. But you need not go yourself; we will bring you 
medicine. Only you must not leave the hut tomorrow until 
we arrive, for the country now belongs to Hongo, and every- 
thing which the Ngoni seize they must bring to Hongo— 
it does not belong to them. Everything will now follow Ngoni 
custom. They will kill everyone they find with European 
clothes. Therefore, our friend, take our advice, then you 
will live.’”?6 
0) 


August 1905 was the month of victories. By its end, German 


: OW \torces existed only on the coast and in the four powerful 
id military stations at Mahenge, Kilosa, Iringa, and Songea. 


If they were to win, the Maji Maji fighters had to capture 
these stations. On 30 August, the Mbunga and Pogoro peoples 
tried to take Mahenge. A missionary described this greatest 
single action of the rising//In Mahenge boma, the day had 
begun with executions: 


Scarcely were the five condemned men hanging on the 
trees when a messenger rushed in with the news that the 
enemy were approaching. Everyone made for the post allot- 
ted to him and peered out in the direction of Isongo, from 
which they were supposed to be coming. We did not have 
to wait long before catching sight of the first groups. These 
groups halted in sight of the boma, probably waiting for 
each other. Shortly after seven o’clock they advanced on the 
boma in close columns. There must have been over a thousand 
men. Since they came to make an end of all of us, we had 
to defend ourselves and take part in the firing, which opened 


20 


on the attackers at about a thousand metres. Two machine- 
guns, Europeans, and soldiers rained death and destruction 
among the ranks of the advancing enemy. Although we saw 
the ranks thin, the survivors maintained order for about a 
quarter of an hour, marching closer amidst a hail of bullets. 
But then the ranks broke apart and took cover behind the 
numerous small rocks. Now and again a group rushed out 
on to the road, lifted one of the fallen, and quickly fled 
again behind the rocks. Scurrying from rock to rock, they 
made their retreat. Then suddenly the cry rang out: “New 
enemy on the Gambira side!” Everyone looked in that direc- 
tion, and there thick clouds of smoke were rising from our 
three schools and a second column of at least 1,200 men was 
advancing towards us. Fire was opened upon them imme- 
diately. The enemy sought to reach Mahenge village at the 
double. There they were hidden by-the houses and stormed 
up the road towards the boma. As soon as they reappeared 
within range they were met by deafening fire. The first 
attackers were only three paces from the firing line when 
they sank to the ground, struck by deadly bullets. Those 
behind them lost courage, turned, and scattered. Fortunately, 
the attack had been beaten off. When no more enemy could 
be seen, the Station Commander climbed down from the 
top of the boma tower, from which he “had commanded 
the defence”, and distributed champagne.?’ 


4 The failure to take Mahenge was the turning point of the 
rising. New German forces moved into the liberated areas. 
First to rise, the Matumbi were also the first to suffer: 


They surrounded the German stockade in many files. The 
Maji Maji warriors shot several times but the Germans 
did not reply. . . . Then at five in the morning the European 
ordered his askari to fire as the Matumbi tried to break into 
the stockade. Oh so many people died that day! For they 
had not known what a machine-gun was. They thought that 
the Germans had run out of ammunition and were beating 
empty tins to frighten them away. Thus the stubborn ones 
received bullets, some in their legs, others in their backs, 
and others in their noses. Far too many people died that day. 
Great mourning followed in the whole Matumbi country. 
From then on they fought in small groups, waylaying the 
German askari.”® 

And they were severely beaten as the machine-gun helped 
the Germans very much. They fought up to five in the even- 
ing. When they realised they were being killed in numbers, 
they fled, crying, “Kinjikitile, you have cheated us”.?%, 


21 


wy 


In Liwale it was the same: 


After the war streams of blood remained. The whole 
area between the boma and the Liwale River was covered 
with blood and the river itself was all blood. They had said 
that the gun would spurt water! But it was all lies. After 
that nobody had any desire to fight the Europeans. They said, 
“Those Wamatumbi cheated us. They said the European’s 
gun would not fire, but how is it that we are now being 
wiped out?” So when we heard that the Europeans were 
coming to Liwale we hid ourselves in the bush.*° 


lr By October 1905, three months after the rising had started, 
German forces were regaining the initiative. Now the Maji 
Maji fighters had to defend themselves by guerrilla action. 
The terms of surrender were harsh: 


The following terms of submission, either for individuals 
or for whole areas, are to be imposed according to circum- 
stances: 


1. The surrender of ringleaders and witch-doctors. 

2. The surrender of all firearms, bows, arrows, and spears. 
If necessary, pressure may be exerted on the people 
by arresting the headmen until the required weapons 
have been surrendered... . : 

3. Besides the tax which he normally pays, every man 
who submits is to pay a fine of three rupees. In cases 
where this is not available, the man is to be required 
to perform paid labour for a productive enterprise 
or a public corporation, in order to earn the fine.... 
The requirement of fines does not prejudice the right 
of military commanders to require especially refractory 
tribes to perform compulsory labour, e.g. to construct 
fortifications. ... 

4, Major sultans and other influential tribal leaders who 
declare the submission of the native communities they 
rule are to be required to provide contingents of several 
hundred men for punitive and compulsory labour for 
the government on the coast. The punitive labour will 
last three to six months for each contingent.*1 


To surrender was bitter, and a reign of terror began in the 
villages: 


An order was issued that the natives should capitulate 
because they could not fight the Europeans. Some agreed to 
surrender and went to Kibata. Their guns and spears were 
destroyed and they were given pieces of white cloth to be 
used as the flag of peace. The white flags were to be fixed 
on the tops of their houses or in the ground before their 


22 


homes. On the other hand some people hated.and killed those 
who had capitulated too soon. So the business of Maji Maji 
began again. And more askari swarmed the country... . 
Askari were then sent to villages to seize food and people’s 
grain. However, it was better if white rather than black 
askari came to the village. These African askari killed 
everyone, children, elders, and women//They ripped open 
pregnant women and left them to die. And sometimes they 
did worse things which I cannot tell here for they were 
really terrible.*? 


YW'As well as the askari, the Maji Maji fighters faced the 
auxiliaries whom the Germans recruited from tribes which 
did not join the risin he following account is by a man 
from eastern Uhehe who fought against the rising in the 
Kilombero Valley: 


Jumbe Pangamasasi, the jumbe of Muhanga, brought the 
news. Then we went at night to tell the Europeans that 
Pangamasasi had brought news that the Vahonga had reach- 
ed his country; they told him to drink the medicine, now he 
refused—Pangamasasi has come to break the news here. 
We set off; when we set off we journeyed until we arrived 
at Muhanga. They said, “The enemies are at Mungeta” [in 
the Kilombero Valley at the foot of the Uzungwa escarp- 
ment]. We set off at midnight. We went right over the hill; 
by the time it had dawned we had descended on the other 
side. Those Vahonga had run away; they said, “Here it is 
too near the hill, the people will run into the hills, we will 
not kill many people.” Then they withdrew; they went to 
the marsh, they went right into the elephant grass. We met 
at Kapalala. Now when we reached them at Kapalala, we 
found some asleep; the whole army had gone to lie in ambush 
in the grass there, and then some said, “We shall go in the 
morning to our friends’—actually, it is those whom we 
found asleep, and then we captured them. When we had 
caught those people we said, “Where is the battle?” They 
said, “The battle is on the path which goes to Ifakara.” Our 
leader, Bwana Fungashenzi, said—he said, “I do not want 
to go there, I want to go to Mudemu” [an Mbunga headman]. 
We returned on the road to Ifakara. Now we are going to 
Mudemu. We went there, and then we heard the noise coming 
from behind. We said, “People are coming shouting behind; 
where have they come from, these people?”—and we passed 
on. The European said, “Hi, you will go with soldier Mpanda- 
jumula; he will fire a gun. After that man has fired a gun 
the Vambunga will run away. You, you will run after them, 
you will go, you will run after them with stabbing spears 
only.” 


23 


i 


We started at a run; we are running, we are running, after 
not a long time our leader said “Eeep!” and we stood still. 
He said, “Stop. I see a lot of enemies.” We stopped. We saw 
those people were emerging; he saw them and said, “All to 
the right”. We went to the right, and then we just lay down, 
we lay in the grass. When we lay there in the grass they 
began, but did not see us. Then they looked; now they are 
looking at the European’s shoeprints, the shoeprints of the 
soldiers; they were not on the road. Again they returned; 
they were moving back and forth in a group, they returned. 
They are looking for shoeprints; there were none there. 
Actually, we had hidden, we were there, we were there in the 
grass where we were lying. The European then saw that they 
were really all gathered together; the people gathered to- 
gether were many. He passed behind, we saw he had gone to 
the back. He said, “Lez ali!” and they lifted their guns to 
their shoulders. “Fiya!”—uwoo. After the guns had sound- 
ed, then they all came together, the enemy, they were com- 
ing, now they were coming towards us. Then they reached 
us—soldier Majilali Daudi, they stabbed him, they reached 
another soldier, Lisasi, whom they speared—then, “Kais 
malis, malis!” Thus he has given the order, now we are run- 
ning away, we are going into the grass, we go into the grass, 
because here in the open space we shall all be finished. 
We entered the elephant grass. The commander turned. He 
said, “Eep!” Thus they all turned and put their guns to 
their shoulders. Now the Vambunga are trying to come, they 
are following the tracks which we had made. It strikes, he is 
on the ground; it strikes, he is on the ground. They try to 
come, they are unable to pass on the side. The Vambunga 
failed completely. Now the battle was getting hot. We shot, 
they were quite finished; they tried to run away out there 
and we ourselves went out. As we looked we saw they were 
quite finished.** 


To the Germans, the leaders of the rising were rebels to be 
executed. So it was in Matumbi:y 


This is how it took place. We, the children, were called on 
the day of execution. We stood in the front. line. Behind us 
stood women, and lastly adult men in the third row. Then 
they brought the victim with much fuss after a trumpet 
had been blown. They made him stand before three piled up 
empty boxes. Then the Bwana Mkubwa descended from his 
seat and stood before us to give reasons for the execution 
of that man. Then he would say in a typical German accent, 
“Do you hear, you children?” And we would answer, “Yes, 
Your Greatness.” Then he asked the women, “Do you all 
hear, you women?” And they answered, “Yes, Your Great- 


24 


ness.” He asked the adult men and they answered in the 
same manner, “Yes, Your Greatness.” Then he ordered a 
sergeant to make the victim mount the three boxes. He 
climbed, and they put a rope round his neck. The boxes 
beneath his feet were pushed away and he hung and died. 
I saw three such cases with my own eyes.** 


On 27 February, 1906, forty-eight Ngoni leaders died on 
the scaffold in Songea, among them Nkosi Mputa Gama, 
paramount chief of southern Ungoni. Fr. Johannes Hafliger 
was with them before their death: 


The District Officer let Fr. Johannes know that the sultans 
were to be hanged today. He could if necessary see for him- 
self whether any of them wished to be baptised. (For Fr. 
Johannes had previously sought permission from the District 
Officer to baptise them if possible.) Fr. Johannes therefore 
went into the gaol, or rather into the passage between the 
gaols, in which the condemned men were lodged. They had 
just received sentence, and things in the gaol were therefore 
animated. Each still had commissions for his dependents to 
carry out. As soon as Fr. Johannes set foot in the place, some 
of those he knew came to him and asked him to undertake 
these commissions, which he said he was prepared to do. 
Then he asked some who had already received a certain 
amount of instruction at Peramiho, “Do you not wish to be 
baptised before you die?” They asked, “Can we do that?” 
When they were assured of this, many raised their hands and 
called out, “I want to be baptised, and I, and I!” A few who 
had not as yet received any instruction asked what this was 
all about. Fr. Johannes told them that if they would only 
be quiet he would explain it to them. Mputa himself then 
demanded silence, and Fr. Johannes instructed them briefly 
in the essential truths and on baptism and contrition. Then 
he asked who wanted to be baptised. Thirty-one men declar- 
ed themselves ready for baptism, among them Sultan Mputa. 
Seventeen men, among whom were numbered a few Muslims, 
wished to know nothing of baptism. Despite exhortation, 
Mpambalyoto said briefly, I will die a pagan. Msimanimoto, 
a chief from the neighbourhood of Peramiho, also wanted 
to know nothing of baptism, for he protested that he would 
die blameless, he had done no wrong. Even those who had 
taken part in the attack on Kigonsera offered themselves for 
baptism, although they had not previously received instruc- 
tion. Some—F ratera, for example—showed themselves espe- 
cially pleased that they could still be baptised. One asked 
whether he would truly rise again. The District Officer had 
allowed half an hour, but not all had been baptised when this 
expired, so that he extended it slightly. When all were bap- 


25 


aes 


tised, they were called out in threes and their hands bound. 
Then they were led out to the gallows, which were alongside 
the gaol, outside the boma. Some took leave of Fr. Johannes 
with the words, “Until we meet again.” As he went out, 
Mputa, who showed genuine contrition, said in his bad 
Swahili, “But Kinjala led me astray.” 

The mood of the condemned men varied. Some cheered 
themselves with the fact that they could at least all die 
together. Kasembe declared: “Why should we fear to die? 
My father is dead, my mother is dead; now do I merely 
follow them.” A few began to tremble somewhat as they 
were called out and bound. Others sat quietly by, and one 
could see from their behaviour that they were grieved and 
reluctant to die. On the whole, the business sat lightly on 
many, who chattered and laughed as at any other time. One 
asked Fr. Johannes for a pinch of snuff. Since he had none, 
he applied to Sergeant Leder, who stood watch, to get some 
from the guard. At this others also wanted snuff, but no 
more could be obtained. Some began to sing as they were led 
out. A few, however, cursed the District Officer especially. 
Mpambalyoto declared that Chabruma would soon come to 
revenge them. Several asked Fr. Johannes to tell their fami- 
lies to bury them themselves, to buy cloth for the purpose 
and to wrap them in it. Bonjoli flatly demanded that Fr. 
Johannes should arrange it so that he was not hanged—from 
now on he would be true. Fratera prayed aloud the “Our 
Father” and “Hail Mary”, and said, after he had been 
instructed, that at the end he would pray, “Jesus, Saviour, 
receive my spirit.” For one the affair went on too long. He 
wanted to be led out before his turn. Fr. Johannes remained 
in the gaol until all had been led out, exhorting them to 
prayer and to a sense of contrition. 

Thus many found at the end a merciful death, many who 
otherwise stood in grave peril of being lost eternally. God 
be thanked for it. 

A vast crowd had naturally assembled outside to be wit- 
nesses of the “spectacle”. 

At evening the hanged men were buried in a large common 
grave.® 


The great men of Ungoni were dead, but other men were 
fighting for their lives in guerrilla warfare throughout the 
south: 


The war is going on just the same; the Wamakonde are to 
the north of Chitangali river; they have rebelled again in 
these days, and the fighting is there. I think it will be many 
days before the fighting ceases, for the rebels on every side 
would rather die than be under the Germans, and many of 


26 


them have died and their wives and children have been 
taken for spoil, but they will not leave off fighting.** 


“German forces had no military answer to guerrilla warfare. 
Instead, they used famine. One commander had recommend- 
ed this as early as October 1905: 


In my view only hunger and want can bring about a final 
submission. Military actions alone will remain more or less 
a drop in the ocean. The people will be compelled to abandon 
their resistance completely only when the food supplies now 
available have been consumed, their houses have been des- 
troyed by constant raids, and they have been deprived of 
the opportunity to cultivate new fields.¥, y DANY yu pa why 


Some officers saw famine as a final solution to the threat 
of revolt. Captain Richter in Songea believed this: 


When Fr. Johannes drew the District Officer’s attention 
to the possibly imminent famine, he replied: That’s right, 
the fellows can just starve. We shall be sure to get food for 
ourselves. If I could, I would even prevent them from plant- 
ing anything. This is the only way that we can make the 
fellows sick of war.*® 


Nine years before, a schoolgirl in Chiwata had expressed 
her bitterness at German rule. Now, a married woman, she 
recorded the horror of starvation: 


We and all the people in our village are in the same condi- 
tion, we are suffering from famine. Since my birth I have 
never seen such scarcity. I have seen famine but not one 
causing people to die. But in this famine many are dying, 
some are unable to do any work at all, they have no strength, 
their food consists of insects from the woods which they dig 
up and cook and eat. Some they eat without cooking. Many 
have died through eating these things from the woods and 
wild fruits. Some do not die at once but when they taste 
good food like millet, maize, or beans, etc., which is their 
usual food, at once their bodies swell and they feel ill and 
die, but some recover.*® 


For many peoples, as for the Matumbi, the famine marked 
the end of a way of life: 


There came three years of famine. Those who survived did 
so by Providence. .. . It was extremely fierce famine and 
people denied their children and wives. It was only those 
who really loved each other who remained together. And 


27 


SSS eee 


V 


even these cooked their food under strict regulations, like 
this: Down in the cooking pot was the child’s food, over which 
were laid pieces of wood. Above these sticks was put the 
wife’s food, and more sticks were placed. The food of the 
husband came on top. During eating they followed a similar 
procedure. The husband started first. When he reached the 
sticks he knew his wife’s food lay immediately below the 
sticks and that his share stopped above them. In the same 
way, when the wife reached the sticks she knew that only 
the child’s share remained. On the other hand, if they did 
not love each other everyone went his way struggling to 
survive. That is why some men had to marry the same woman 
twice, for they had deserted them during the famine. When 
he searched for his former wife her parents asked him, 
‘Where did you leave her?” So he had to pay dowry again. 
This famine was called Fugufugu. There has never been the 
like either before or after Maji Maji. Other famines are 
merely babes before the famine after Maji Maji. People died 
in multitudes and bodies were left to rot as there was nobody 
able to bury them. People slept in the open for there were 
no houses, and lions ate one after the other. There was no 
seed to plant. During famine we ate insects. .. . Before the 
war the population was very dense and it was very difficult 
to find a piece of land on which to grow food. If you got a 
small piece of land you thanked God—there were too many 
people. Now, alas, you only see much bush everywhere.*° 


Those who had fought and suffered turned in bitterness on 
their leaders. Matumbi elders sang this song: 


The swindle of Kinjikitile 
He deceived people 
To go to Ngarambe 
To drink the maji.*t 


For the educated men of th time, Maji Maji was a hideous 
lesson in European strength: ree years after the end of the 
rising, a teacher wrote to celebrate the birthday of the 
German Kaiser: 


For what reason do the people celebrate this festival? ... 
The Lord God gives the Kaiser strength and power to 
accomplish all that happens in the land, and to govern and 
order all things so that they continue in peace. ... As an 
example I take this land of German East Africa, our land, 
the land of the black people. Formerly its condition was one 
of injustice. The man with power treated unjustly the man 
who had none. ... But now there is peace everywhere. There 
is none who terrorises, for all are under the Kaiser’s rule. ... 


28 


If anyone will not keep the peace and live peacefully in his 
land—if he seeks to disturb the country—that man will be 
severely punished, for the Kaiser lacks nothing, he has many 
soldiers. His strength and power are great. You have seen 
how those rebels, the Maji-Maji or Hongo-Hongo people, 
were defeated in the years 1905 and 1906!%2 


” Fifty years passed before articulate Tanzanians expressed 
another view of the rising in public. Addressing the United 
Nations in 1956, President Nyerere recognised the impact of 
the rising on the generation that followed, but he also claim- 
ed it as an inspiration to Tanzanian nationalism—an inspira- 
tion which belonged truly to the people: 


There was no nationalist movement, no nationalist agita- 
tors, no westernised demagogues, or subversive Communists 
who went about the country stirring up trouble against the 
Germans. The people fought because they did not believe 
in the white man’s right to govern and civilize the black. 
They rose in a great rebellion not through fear of a terrorist 
movement or a superstitious oath, but in response to a natural 
call, a call of the spirit, ringing in the hearts of all men, and 
of all times, educated or uneducated, to rebel against foreign 
domination. It is important to bear this in mind ... in order 
to understand the nature of a nationalist movement like 
mine. Its function is not to create the spirit of rebellion but 
to articulate it and show it a new technique. 

The struggle against the Germans proved to our people 
the futility of trying to drive out their masters by force.*#/ 


il And what of the people themselves? They also saw a con- 
nection between Maji Maji and nationalism, and at first 
their feelings were mixed: 


The movement of Kinjikitile and his maji went around 
like TANU. You know that when TANU started secretaries 
and other leaders were posted all over the country? In Dar 
es Salaam TANU had already been known. Kinjikitile’s 
words were known in Ngarambe and they spread through 
extensive lands by Jujila or Mtemela. It is true that a source 
of salvation cannot hide itself from the people... . 

When TANU began some people cried, “This is how Maji 
Maji began. We failed to drive away the Europeans by war. 
How can we do this by a mere fifty cents? Do not believe 
these, they are cheats. It is another Kinjikitile.” Not all 
accepted the news of maji. But those who did not suffered 
as well. The Maji Maji warriors hated and killed them, and 
the German askari did not discriminate—he killed every 
African he came across. This was similar to TANU. Some 


29 


ee we eee ee 


a 


have joined, others have not, but we are all independent. 
Is this not so?#* 


Indeed it was so, and with independence men began to 
think again about the rising. It is well to end where the story 
of Maji Maji began, in Matumbi: 


Their camp was there at Madukani. That was the head- 
quarters of the war itself. It would be fitting if that place 
were honoured will a national flag. For that was the begin- 
ning of freedom.” 


30 


aa fF wow NY 


REFERENCES 


Agnes Achitinao to Rev. C. C. Child, from Chiwata, 15 March 

1898, USPG Archives (London), UMCA A/5. 

te Achitinao to Rev. C. C. Child, 14 March 1899, UMCA 
5. 

Mzee Ambrose Ngombale Mwiru of Kipatimu, interviewed 26 

Sept. 1967. 

beg Ndundule Mangaya of Kipatimu, interviewed 2-10 Sept. 

1967. 

Mzee Nduli Njimbwi of Mtumbei Kipatimu, interviewed 24 

Sept. 1967. 

Statement by Geibler and Hajdu, enclosed in C. Vincenti and 

E. Haber, “Betr. Ursachen des Aufstandes im Bezirk Daressalam”, 

17 Jan. 1906, Deutsches Zentralarchiv, Potsdam, Reichskolonial- 

amt [RKA] 726/109-25. 

Mzee Ambrose Ngombale Mwiru of Kipatimu, interviewed 8 

Aug. 1967. 

Mzee Mohamed Mbenju of Namatewa, interviewed 1 Sept. 1967. 

eo Kibilange Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 6-22 Sept. 

1967. 


. Mzee Elisei Simbanimoto Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 4 


Sept. 1967. 


. Bw. Sebastian Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 5 Sept. 1967. 


Mzee Mohamed Nganoga Nimekwako of Ngarambe Ruhingo, 
interviewed 31 Aug. 1967. ; 
Mzee Ndundule Mangaya of Kipatimu, interviewed 7 Aug. 1967. 


. Moritz Merker, “Ueber die Aufstandsbewegung in Deutsch- 


Ostafrika”, Militéir-Wochenblatt, vol. 91 (1906), cols. 1022-23. 
Mzee Mohamed Nganoga of Ngarambe Ruhingo, interviewed 
31 Aug. 1967. 


. Bw. Sebastian Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 5 Sept. 1967. 


Mzee Elisei Simbanimoto Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 4 
Sept. 1967. 

Mzee Ngapata Mkupali of Mipoto Chumo, interviewed 21 Sept. 
1967. 


. Mzee Kibilange Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 6-22 Sept. 


1967. 
Bw. Ali Abdallah Kapungu of Kibata, interviewed 23 Aug. 
1967. 


. Mzee Ndundule Mangaya of Kipatimu, interviewed 7 Aug. 1967. 
. Eduard Haber to Graf von Gétzen, 9 Sept. 1905, RKA 726/81-90. 


Martin Klamroth, “Beitrage zum Versténdnis der religidsen 
Vorstellungen der Saramo im Bezirk Daressalam”, Zeitschrift 
fiir Kolonialsprachen, vol. 1 (1910-11), pp. 140-41. 


. Fr. Theobald Schaegelen, “The Ethnology of the Vidunda Tribe”, 


manuscript, 1945, in Kilosa District Book (Area Office, Kilosa). 


. Blasius Undole, “Habari za Wandamba”, typescript, 1965 (copy 


in Dr. Iliffe’s possession). 

Mw. Yosefu Sihaba to Fr. Cyrillus Wehrmeister, 16 Nov. 1905, 
eine in Cyrillus Wehrmeister, Vor dem Sturm (St, Ottilien, 
1906), p. 186. 


. “Kwiro Chronicle’, 31 Aug. 1905 (written Nov. 1907), Kwiro 


Archives. 
Mzee Ndundule Mangaya of Kipatimu, interviewed 7 Aug. 1967. 


. Bw. Abdulrahman Lipunjo Mandwanga of Kibata, interviewed 


28 Aug. 1967. 


. Mzee Abushiri Shindu of Barikiwa Liwale, interviewed 13 Oct. 


1967. 
Governor Graf von Gdtzen, ‘“Befehl an die Truppenfiihrer”, 11 
Nov. 1905, Tanzania National Archives III/F/20/I. 


31 


= eee 


32. Mzee Ambrose Ngombale Mwiru of Kipatimu, interviewed 8 
Aug. 1967. 

33. Mzee Tanangosi Mwamwangamila of Itagamenda, Luhota, 
Iringa district, interviewed by Dr. Alison Redmayne, 2 July 
1963. A copy of the recording is in the British Institute of 
Recorded Sound, London. 

34. Mzee Ambrose Ngombale Mwiru of Kipatimu, interviewed 8 
Aug. 1967. 

35. “Kigonsera Chronicle”, 27 Feb. 1906, written by Fr. Johannes 
Hafliger, presumably somewhat after this date, Peramiho 
Archives. 

36. Rev. Yustino Mkandu to Bishop J. E. Hine, from Masasi, 31 Dec. 
1905, printed in Central Africa, vol. 24 (Apr. 1906), p. 88. 

37. Capt. Wangenheim to Graf von Gétzen, from Kilosa, 22 Oct. 
1905, printed in G. A. von Gétzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika im Auf- 
stand 1905-06 (Berlin, 1909), p. 149. 

38. “Kigonsera Chronicle”, 7 Feb. 1906. 

39. Agnes Sapuli to Rev. C. C. Child, from Mwiti, 28 Feb. 1907, 

UMCA A/5. 
. Mzee Camelius Kiango of Nandete, interviewed 5 Sept. 1967. 
41. Bw. Sebastian Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 5 Sept. 1967. 
42. Mw. Martin Ganisya in Pwani na Bara, Jan. 1910. 

; 43. Julius K. Nyerere, statement to the U.N. Fourth Committee, 

; 20 Dec. 1956, printed in Julius K. Nyerere, Freedom and Unity 

‘ (Dar es Salaam: OUP, 1966), pp. 40-41. 

44, Mzee Nassoro Hassan Kipungo of Makata Liwale, interviewed 

i 14 Oct. 1967. 

? 45. Mzee Elisei Simbanimoto Upunda of Nandete, interviewed 4 

| Sept. 1967. 


ay 
a 
Oo 


EEE 


Published by the East African Publishing House Ltd., P.O. Box 30571 
Uniafric House, Koinange Street, Nairobi and printed by The English 
Press Ltd., P.O. Box 30127, Reata Rd., Nairobi 9899 


32 


—— 


THE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION OF TANZANIA 


The objects of the Historical Association of Tanzania are to 
encourage the study, writing and teaching of history throughout 
the United Republic. This is the third of a series of papers, of 
which three will be published each year. Annual subscription 
rates are as follows: 


Ordinary members... see age a ales Shs. 10.00 
Institutional members ... oa x0 ai bas Shs. 30.00 
Student members aa aia ss tats se Shs. 2.00 


Subscriptions should be sent to the Honorary Secretary, Depart- 
ment of History, The University College, P.O. Box 9184, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 


Other Association Papers available 


I. THE EAST AFRICAN COAST J.E.G. Sutton Shs. 2/50 
2. WEST APRA sia THE ATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE 
ae W. Rodney Shs. 2/50 


3. THE EAST “AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE 


E. A. Alpers Shs. 


EAST AFRICAN PUBLISHING HOUSE 
KOINANGE STREET, P.O. BOX 30571, NAIROBI 


2/50 


