| = AND 2S 


ON THE BUSES 


The 1963 Colour 
Bar Dispute ae | 
in Bristol =p <= & 


MADGE DRESSER 


SN ee See ee 


BLACK & WHITE 
ON THE BUSES 


by Madge Dresser 


The 1963 Colour Bar Dispute in Bristol 


BLACK AND WHITE 
ON THE BUSES 


by Madge Dresser 


| LIVERPOOL INSTITUTE 
OF HIGHER EDUCATION 


a MY 


The 1963 Colour Bar Dispute in Bristol 


Acknowledgements: 


Thanks to: South West Arts, Avon County 
Council, Bristol City Council. 


Produced by: Bristol Broadsides (Co-op) Ltd. 
108c Stokes Croft, 
Bristol BS1 3RU. 


Copyright: © Madge Dresser and Bristol 
Broadsides. (1986) 

Printing: Pressgang Co-operative Ltd. 

Typesetting by: J.C.L. Graphics Ltd. 


ISBN 0 906944 30 9. 


More copies available from Bristol Broadsides at £1.95 (plus 60p 
p&p). 

Bristol Broadsides is a member of the Federation of Worker 
Writers and Community Publishers. 


Photograph Acknowledgements: 


Thanks to the following Newspapers: Bristol Evening Post and 
The Western Daily Press. 


Cover Designed by Rob McKay. 


Many thanks to all those who helped me, most of whom are 
acknowledged in the footnotes. I am especially grateful to those 
who read and commented on a preliminary draft of this article 
including: Peter Fryer, Helen Taylor, C.L.R. James, Michael 
Banton, Paul Stephenson, Martin Barker and Avtar Brah. 
Thanks too to Reena Bhavnani, Yvonne Douglas and family, 
Ron Ramdin, Astley Murray, Wilf Summerbell, and the members 
of Bristol Broadsides. 

With thanks to the staff of the Bristol City Records Office. 


. 


INTRODUCTION 


“Tf you would know your history, then you would know where you’re 
coming from.” (Bob Marley ) 


This pamphlet may stir up controversy, but that was not its original 
intention. My aim was to write history, to bear witness to the 
experience of both black and white Bristolians. 

No history is purely objective, for there is always the selection of 
facts, and facts are themselves the product of interpretation. But I 
have tried to be fair and to respect the historical evidence available to 
me. 

I hope that my pamphlet will be a useful resource to the black youth 
of Britain in their exploration of their own past. I hope it conveys to 
them some sense of what their parents and grandparents went through 
on their arrival in this country. The modest concessions they gained 
were won by courage and persistence. Their stories are worth retelling. 

It is worth recording too, that the motives of whose whites who 
supported the bus boycott cannot be explained away, as some would 
like to do, as middlesome do-gooding or cynical politicking. People 
who can see beyond their own immediate self interest and comfort are 
rare, and this pamphlet is a testiment to all those, black, frown and 
white, who swam against a tide of complacency and intolerance. 

Finally, it is my fervent hope that this article is not dismissed as a 
union bashing piece. True, it does expose the racism and insensitivity 
which existed amongst the rank and file bus crews. But it also shows 
how much such attitudes were grounded in fears about economic 
security at a time of great social and cultural change. 

The spirit of solidarity amongst the crews is in many ways inspiring 
and I am grateful for the hospitality and honesty of those busmen and 
women I interviewed. 

The Regional and National leaderships of the TGWU are now 
evolving their own policies against racism. I hope this pamphlet will be 
of use to them as part of that process. 


Madge Dresser 
October 1986. 


BLACK AND WHITE ON THE BUSES 
The 1963 Colour Bar Dispute in Bristol 
Madge Dresser 


Few people today remember much about the campaign against the 
colour bar on Bristol’s buses. Yet, in 1963, when Black Americans 
were beginning their long campaign for Civil Rights, and when the 
screws of the Apartheid system were being turned ever more tightly in 
South Africa, a small but highly charged drama was also unfolding in 
Bristol, England over racial discrimination. 

It is a story which involves black and white Bristolians of all classes 
and most opinions. On the 30th of April 1963 local West Indian 
activists publicly exposed Bristol Omnibus Company’s long standing 
colour bar against black bus crews. The bar was perfectly legal, for 
although an Immigration Act had been passed the year before, no law 
yet existed against racial segregation or discrimination. But the time 
was ripe for change. When the Bus Company’s General Manager, Ian 
Patey defended the bar, black activists declared a bus boycott, 
University students marched in protest, and angry white bus crews 
heckled the West Indians’ spokesman, Paul Stephenson. 

The local Press had a field day, television crews moved in, and soon 
the national Press featured the dispute. By the time the row was 
settled, four months later, an array of big names had entered the fray. 
Politicians like Harold Wilson, Tony Benn, and Fenner Brockway and 
eminent sportsmen like Sir Learie Constantine, by then a high ranking 
diplomat, all made their presence felt. Ron Nethercott, the Regional 
Secretary for the Transport and General Workers’ Union (TGWU) 
clashed with Stephenson who later successfully sued him for libel in 
the High Court. The Bishop of Bristol and other churchmen pleaded 
for reconciliation and the Bristol Evening Post had its biggest postbag 
for decades. Secret negotiations between the busmen’s union and the 
Bus Company ensued. By the end of August, the colour bar was 
declared officially dead. By mid September, a Sikh college graduate 
by the name of Raghbir Singh became Bristol’s first ‘coloured’ bus 
conductor. 

These are the bare bones of the story. The questions they raise are 
much meatier. Was, for example, the colour bar a ‘bosses’ plot’ or the 
will of the workers? Was Paul Stephenson an unrepresentative 
troublemaker|or a ‘tribune of the people’? And just how dead was the 
colour bar tle it had been formally interred? 

This account of the Bristol colour bar dispute has been constructed 
from Press Reports, Council records, and interviews with many of the 


6 


people involved. !« But it would be disingenuous to claim that I have let 
the people ‘speak for themselves’. For some people, like Mr. Wally 
Jenkins who led Bristol’s Labour Group on the City Council in the 
early ‘60’s, and Mr. Bill Smith, then the Chairman of Bristol’s West 
Indian Association have refused to be interviewed. By the same token, 
written records were rather hard to obtain. The Bristol Omnibus 
Company insists that all its records are automatically destroyed after 
five years. The Regional officials of the TGWU, who kindly granted 
me interviews, could not find their written records for this period. The 
records of the Bishop of Bristol’s Social and Industrial Mission were 
lost in a recent move. And the City Archives are curiously incomplete 
for 1963, the year of the dispute. 

Still, there is enough material to piece together a preliminary 
account of this most intriguing episode of Bristol’s recent history. 

Three people who had long known about the colour bar on the 
Bristol buses were Roy Hackett, Owen Henry and Peter Carty. They 
were all young men in their twenties when they came to Bristol around 
1957. Like the thousand other West Indians then living in the city, 
these sons of poor Jamaican cultivators came in search of a more 
prosperous life.! 

Owen Henry worked in a succession of labouring jobs beginning at 
Avonmouth Flour Mills before opening up a small shipping and travel 
firm in St. Paul’s in 1967. Like Hackett and Carty he found low paid 
jobs easier to come by than housing. 

‘Things was very rough during those days for us, living 

accommodation we couldn’t really find easily . . . There were a 

few white people . . . who’d been prepared to take us in as 

lodgers. But this means losing their next-door neighbours’ 

Friendship ’.? 

Carty too, recalls: 

‘Yes it was bad when we just come here because, true, we 
couldn’t get anywhere from the white people to rent... .’3 

All three men found lodgings in or near City Road, St. Paul’s. 

This area was running down before black immigration became 
significant. Bristol’s planners noted the exodus of better off whites 
throughout the early 1950s. The large houses being vacated were going 
cheap and were ripe for multi-occupation. Black people settled in the 
area, a few buying, most renting, precisely because they couldn’t find 
or afford accommodation in the more desireable parts of the city.¢ 

As they came into St. Paul’s, the immigrants were blamed by some 

for the deteriorating conditions they encountered. 
According to one source: ‘The sort of thing that was being said in the 
papers (was that) the ones who were arriving first were buying big 
houses and exploiting new arrivals by letting them at exorbitant rents 
and this was good for a lot of criticism in the town!’s 


Those new arrivals who’d actually lived through the experience 
seem to have been grateful to anyone, black or white, who would give 
them a roof, however leaky, over their head. Owen Henry remembers 
his first Bristol digs: 

‘There were a few Asians and they pooled together and we 
managed to rent from them. I was into a lodgings. In one room 
there was six of us... the (white) landlady was a very nice lady. 

She was very helpful. The furniture wasn’t much good. The 

linens weren’t much good. I mean I was there a fortnight and I 

had to buy my own bed linen because they weren’t changing 

them regularly enough. But I was glad to be there because the 
rest of the fellows living in that room (Irish, West Indian and 

Africans) were quite friendly’.6 

Friendliness was a precious commodity when people like Owen 
Henry felt unsafe alone on the streets at night: 

‘We couldn’t walk the streets on our own... ‘cause of the 
Teddy boys and at night, I should say, they would always gang 
up on us. So everytimes we go out we have to go out ina file of 
six or so’. 

Peter Carty was also ‘glad’ to be staying in a friend of a friend’s 
house when he first arrived. 

‘Well his room was a bit small so I decided to look one myself. I 
went to several white peoples’ home but they refused to rent me 
aroom... And the only person who will take us in their home is 
the Polish and we were welcome by them. . .’8 

Despite the exploitation that must have occurred one can see the 
logic behind Carty’s argument that: 

‘If a black man have a room or a home then he’ll try to help all 
the rest of the blacks to put them in and then when the white 
people see so many of us living in one home they started to 
grumble about it and yet they have a place and refuse to rent it!’9 

Roy Hackett too found himself in the City Road area even though it 
meant he had to get up at four am to get to his job at Hinkley Point 
Atomic Power station by eight.1° 

Yet from the vantage point of many white working class Bristolians 
the plight of the West Indians could arouse resentment rather than 
sympathy. ‘John Garrett’, (not his real name) a busman and minor 


eee official in the mid fifties, felt he was hard pressed enough 


supporting his family without having to help those he saw as uninvited 
strangers. 
*... they were bringing shipments of these people over from you 
know, from wherever it was. And it wasn’t a question of 
families at that time, it was individuals in the main that were 
coming and there was a question of where they were going to 
stay . .. At the same time as this was going on, there was a 


chappie who was (assistant to the) industrial adviser to the 

Bishop of Bristol, and his name was Andrew Hake. . . And he 

paid a visit to Cliff Price (another union official) and me... and 

he was talking then . . . (about) providing accommodation for 
the coloured people and uh I mean I had four children by the 
ways, four boys then living at home (in a three bedroom house) 

... So he was on, you know about brotherly love and all this kind of 

business and he thought that we ought to put ourselves out you 

know, and during the conversation I asked him where he lived and 

he was living in a big house on the Downs so I said, ‘Is it a big 

house?’ and he said, ‘yeah.’ So then I said, ‘Well, how many 

darkies have you got living there?’ So end of conversation!’ 

(Laughs).?! 

John Garrett’s hostility may have been grounded in class resentment 
but there was more to it than that. To Garrett, ‘these people’ that ‘they’ 
were bringing over were, after all ‘darkies.’ His choice..of words 
confirms what he himself readily admits: 

‘Now at this time we were talking colour bar, let’s be honest.’ 

It would be unfair to forget that there were white Bristolians 
especially from the St. Paul’s area who did extend a welcome to the West 
Indians. Their personal acts of kindness should not go unrecorded. It 
would be difficult to prove, but there was a consensus among the early 
Jamaican settlers that were it not for the kindness and companionship 
of some white women, life would have been even more difficult than it 
was. Some of these women, particularly those who later got caught up in 
the area’s criminal subculture received poor recompense for their 
kindness. Others were treated with love and respect. The word sexism 
had not yet been invented in the early 1960s, but like racism, it too 
existed and must be acknowledged. !2 

What should be acknowledged too was the objection at ‘gut level’ 
that some Bristolians held about English women going out with West 
Indian men on any terms.!3 Owen Henry remembers that he and his 
friends were banned from a dance hall they rented allegedly for 
‘dancing with their hats on.’ The real reason for their being banned 
was that they were dancing with white women. Another Jamaican 
man, who came to Bristol in the late fifties observed: 

‘They (white people) see these West Indian chaps going out with 
white girls and they have the impression that all of them were 
using them (the women) for prostitution, to live off their 
immoral earnings, when in . . . in most cases it was not so.”!4 

By 1958, the number of West Indian residents had begun to include 
the wives, family and friends of the first arrivals. There were perhaps 
1,500 West Indians now in Bristol, still less than 1% of the city’s 
population.1s 

Yet despite their small numbers, unemployment began to become a 


problem. It may seem strange in the 1980s that an unemployment rate 
of 2.2% could excite such anxiety, but it did. As early as 1958, an 
earnest young researcher, Jessie Hood, reported to the Committee for 
the Welfare of Colonial Workers (a committee sponsored by the Lord 
Mayor and the Bishop of Bristol) that: 
‘Fear of increasing unemployment has made many English 
people more conscious of the presence of coloured people. Many 
white people who had a ‘live and let live’ attitude to coloured 
people two years ago (in 1956) are now asking why coloured 
people should be allowed to come into this country and are 
showing hostility when speaking about coloured people 
although not necessarily when speaking to coloured people. ”!6 
The Teddy Boy violence which Owen Henry had encountered in the 
earlier days had by 1958 erupted far more seriously in the Notting Hill 
and Nottingham race riots.!7 In Bristol, West Indians had begun to 
clash with the Teddy Boys. One Jamaican man remembers feeling fed 
up that: 
(you) can’t go out on the street, can’t see your wife go out with 
worry that she’d be attacked by Teddy Boys... . In the pub down 
here, . . . it used to be called the Britannia, now they call it 
Inkerman, we couldn’t go down there to have a drink — it 
would be a blood bath! We had to stand up to those type of 
things. . . as soon as there were more of us (in Bristol) we had to 
stand up to them, there was no question about that . . . Ashley 
Road (the top end), the Hatchet, all those places were places 
where you must have a fight if you go down there. Southmead, 
one black person couldn’t go to Southmead in the pub.”'8 
The sources of tension in Bristol were the same as those cited in 
Notting Hill and Nottingham: competition for employment, sexual 
jealousy and housing shortages. But fights aside, there were no riots, 
more a silent closing of white ranks, as this following report suggests: 
‘There are indications that more employers in Bristol are 
definitely saying ‘no coloured workers’ and those who already 
employ coloured people are often unwilling to engage others, 
even to replace a coloured employee. ’!9 
From her own small survey based on grass roots welfare advice 
work with immigrants, Jesse Hood concluded that both men and 
women from the Caribbean were finding it harder to get jobs. Factory 
work was becoming scarcer and even building work was becoming 
more casualised. 
‘New arrivals are taking much longer to find work; some have 
been in Bristol for months without finding jobs. There are a few 
West Indians known to me that have had only a few weeks 
employment in the year . . . These people still walk around 
Bristol daily looking for work.’ 


10 


Even on the basis of official figures which underestimated 
joblessness — especially among married women, black unemployment 
in Bristol in 1958 was roughly 5%, over twice the rate suffered by 
whites. Morale, among West Indians, said Hood was ‘surprisingly 
high.’ But the seeds of discontent and bitterness were being sown. 

By 1960, about half of Bristol’s 3,000 strong West Indian 
population were crowded into a few streets in St. Paul’s.20 City Road 
was the first stop of the poor rural migrant, just as St. Jude’s had been 
in Bristol some 60 years before. Only now the rural poor came from 
further afield than Somerset, Wales or Ireland.2! The world was 
shrinking and the Empire was coming back home to roost. 

The City Road area with its decaying and over crowded tenements, 
had grown notorious, by the early 60s. Its small but highly visible 
contingent of hustlers and pimps affected the way many Bristolians 
perceived ALL West Indians. Although the majority of her residents 
were white, St. Paul’s became the ‘coloured area,’ ‘coloured’ meant 
City Road, and ‘City Road’ conjured up fears and fantasies of 
violence, immorality and lawlessness. In the highhanded language of 
the city’s Welfare Department: 

‘Tt is very easy for non-thinking members of the public to bracket all 
immigrants together and regard them as ‘no good.”’ ’ 

To the West Indians trying to survive there, City Road may have 
been a ‘Shanty Town’ but at least it was friendly. Some who could 
afford it, bought their own homes and moved, out of the area 
altogether. But those who did found its lurid image followed them. 
For a start, property values threatened to plummet when black 
families moved into a street. It wasn’t just the brightly coloured 
brickwork or the reported penchant for ‘playing jazz records 
extremely loud,’ which could make house prices fall. It was a fear of 
low standards — as much moral as economic, which had little to do 
with the actual standards of the actual individuals moving in. Roy 
Hackett recalls the time when he and his new wife Ena were 

‘living in a particular road where there were two black families... 

in Royate Hill. . . my first house... And I was told afterward by 

my (white) neighbours (about) you know, the leg pulling they get 

at work, about black neighbours and so on, and you know ‘have 

you got a daughter?’ and all that sort of thing. Fair enough, 

people can say what they wanted to say. (But it is) the thing that I 

do that really either no good or good. And I tried myself to be a 

good neighbour!’ 

Other West Indians, even those who like Owen Henry bought their 
own homes, preferred to stay in the City Road St. Paul’s area. This 
was to the despair of some city housing officials who wanted to 
‘disperse’ the black population rather like one disperses a dark stain. 
Even the more sympathetic officials from the Public Health Dept. 


11 


seemingly failed to appreciate that the ‘ghetto’, such as it was, seemed 
to some like a haven in a heartless world. As Lissett Simpson a 
‘housewife’ told a local reporter in 1961: 
‘We would not be happy away from here. There is still so much 
prejudice that we prefer to stay together’.25 

As the Afro-Caribbean community expanded, it generated more 
social and religious groups. Most of these were of an informal nature. 
Repulsed by local white churches, most West Indians retreated to the 
black led Pentecostal church or met in each other’s homes.26 There 
was no one organization representing immigrant interests, there was 
only the ‘Colonial Association,’ which had been set up for West 
Indian ex-servicemen and their English wives in the early fifties.27 But 
Owen Henry remembers helping to transform this group into the West 
Indian Association. This association could never recruit the mass of 
West Indians in Bristol but it was the nearest thing the community had 
to a representative group. By 1962, the year of Jamaican 
independence ex- R.A.F. man, Bill Smith was chairman. 

Bill Smith worked in the same firm as Wally Jenkins, Councillor for 
St. Paul’s and the leader of Bristol Council’s Labour opposition. 
Smith thus became an informal link man with the City Council. Henry 
and Hackett tried to raise issues of discrimination in employment and 
housing through Smith.28 They also met on several occasions with 
Councillors and officials themselves, but felt they were getting 
‘promises, promises,’ but not much else. 

One of the areas of discrimination that rankled most was the colour 
bar on the buses. Union officials might later deny there was one, or 
plead ignorance about its existence. But in the late 1950s the colour 
bar’s existence was virtually common knowledge in some circles. Yet, 
no-one on the Council or in the local leadership of the Transport and 
General Workers’ Union seems to have moved a finger to get it lifted. 
In fact, it seems, the Bus Company initiated the ban after a union 
ballot of workers in 1955.29 

The Passenger Group of the TGWU in Bristol reportedly passed a 
resolution in January of that year that coloured workers should not be 
employed, as bus crews.30 The maintainance section however, voted 
the other way,?! and black people were soon taken on in the garages. 
Andrew Hake, then an enthusiastic curate attached to the Bishop of 
Bristol’s Industrial Mission, remembers that: 

‘The TGWU in the city had said that if one black man steps on 
the platform as a conductor, every wheel will stop. This seemed 
absolutely wrong . . . what we would now call racism. I’m not 
sure that that word was used much in those days. . .”32 

Hake confronted a member of the management of Bristol Omnibus 
Company on this issue sometime in 1956 or ‘57. The management, he 
recalls, told him they had 


12 


“.. . no objection to employing black people . . . but (that) the 
unions had made their position clear and the management were 
not prepared to face a showdown, a confrontation which would 
have led to strike action. And so they were biding their time and 
waiting for this to change. ’3 

Was the management such an unwilling accomplice to the bar? And 
what was behind the union’s position? These are questions we shall 
come to later. For now it is enough to establish that a colour bar was 
passed, similar to a ban passed by Coventry busmen that same year, 
and was known about by union members. The only two categories of 
union members who opposed this ban were in the words of Hake 
either ‘Christians or Communists.’ No one else seemed to care and 
even these elements were too poorly organised to take action. 

By the early ‘60s one local Labour activist, then a Bristol Trades 
Council member confirmed that: 

‘It was taken for granted in the movement that the TGWU was 

operating a veto... . one could not help but notice there wasn’t a 

single coloured face (on the buses). . . apart from some we never 

saw who might have been washing down the things at night.’#4 

Hackett and Henry too, had seen black people working on the buses 
in London, Wolverhampton and Manchester. Owen Henry reasoned 
that although 

‘. . . there was no black crews in any of the (Bristol) buses . . . 

there was quite enough black people that were using the buses . . 

. enough to pay a black person’s wages and this wasn’t being 

done.’ 

Indeed Peter Carty remembers a number of friends who tried for a 
job on the buses who had been rebuffed by the Bristol Omnibus 
Company: 

‘. . . and they are capable people, they are people capable 

enough to do bus driving and conducting. And they went there 

and they refused to give them a job.’ 

Allegations that such a colour bar existed were made public in a 
series of exposé articles in the Bristol Evening Post in 1961.35 One of 
the articles in the series, written by Roger Bennett, aired the bitterness 
of three City Road residents — Fianzo Clarke, Henry Patrick and 
Patrick Shillingford — about 

‘what they called unnecessary insults to their race — particularly 

the Bristol Omnibus Company’s failure to employ coloured 

labour. ‘We only ride on the buses if it is very cold or it pours 
with rain,’ said Mr. Clarke.’3 

Another article in the series, by Malcolm Smith, was more hard 
hitting. He revealed there was: 

“.. @ flat refusal by the under-manned Bristol Omnibus 

Company to employ coloured people in their crews, however 


13 


high their skill. ’37 

The company reportedly blamed prejudice amongst the workers as 
the reason for the lack of black personnel. But the article made no 
mention of any deal with the unions. Indeed, Ron Nethercott, the 
TGWU’s regional secretary, adamantly denied any decision to ban 
West Indians had been made: 

‘... there is no colour bar. We have a lot of coloured members 

in Bristol, most of them on the labouring side. 38 

Strictly speaking, Nethercott was right. The TGWU as a whole did 
not operate a colour bar. Indeed, the Quaker owned Fry’s chocolate 
factory employed several hundred black workers who were bona fide 
members of Nethercott’s union. But what Nethercott ommited to 
explain was that the TGWU had not opposed their Passenger Division 
from passing a colour bar on the buses! 

The bus company’s General Manager, Ian Patey was a bit more 
forthcoming. A few West Indians, he reportedly explained: 

*_. . were employed in the garage but this was labouring work in 

which capacity most employers were prepared to accept them.’ 

Malcolm Smith’s article concluded that a formal colour bar 
probably did exist on the buses, despite the denials of both union and 
management. 

Sometime in 1962, Ena Hackett, Roy Hackett’s wife, applied for a 
job as bus conductress and was turned down, despite the reported 
labour shortage on the buses: 

“.. . it always been in the newspaper, the Evening Post that, ‘we 
cannot run the buses because we haven’t got any staff.’ And at 
the time my wife had applied for a job on the buses. 
Unfortunately, it was always, ‘No, we can’t have you.’ Then 
there was no law against discrimination. ’# 

Hackett goes on to explain what happened next: 

“.. . Owen Henry and I who were good friends at the time talked 
about it and said, ‘what can we do about it?’ And then we ask 
(Audley) Evans (another Jamaican) to join us... We think, 
‘Well, it’s about time to put pressure on Bristol City Council. . .’ 
We thought, ‘should we talk to them? — Yes!’ We... sent 
delegation to the Bristol City Council telling them of our plight 
... before the (1963) crisis, through Bill Smith . .. And we never get 
anywhere and we thought it’s about time for action. *4 

The ginger group that grew out of the younger men’s dissatisfaction 
was later to be called the West Indian Development Council. It was to be 
more political than the West Indian Association which saw itself more as a 
cultural and social group. The Group consisted at first of Henry, Hacket, 
Audley Evans and another Jamaican, Prince Brown. It was at this point, 
in 1962, that Henry met ayoung newcomer to Bristol, by thename of Paul 
Stephenson. 


14 


Stephenson was not West Indian. His father was West African and his 
mother came from a long established British family. His maternal 
grandmother Edie Johnson had for example been a well known West End 
actress in the 1920s. Stephenson himself was born in England and was 
evacuated in 1940 at the age of two to live in an (all white) Essex village. 
After a stint with the RAF in West Germany during national service, 
Stephenson bought himself out and did a community work course at West 
Hill College in Birmingham. In 1962, he had just arrived in Bristol as the 
city’s first black youth officer. Like Jesse Hood, his job was financed by 
an external grant.42 

Stephenson was sent to work with West Indian youth, in St. Paul’s. 
This was quite a change from his former experience. Henry introduced 
him to the small group who formed the embryonic core of the West Indian 
Development Council. The group already existed informally before 
Stephenson arrived on the scene, but it was he who stimulated it into 
effective life. Owen Henry recalls: 

‘Paul and I met at a dance hall, Jamaican Independence or 
something. We got talking and we seemed to realise that we had 
similar intentions as such and so we started meeting. Andhe was... 

(introduced) to the Development Council and so we meet on 

Sunday mornings. (and then he would come) And we discussed 

quite a number of things and we decided that if and when we make a 

move we must only have one spokesman, and it was decided that 

Paul would be the spokesman.’ 

Stephenson must have seemed a good choice. He was educated, 
articulate, and probably more confident in his dealings with whites 
than were his working class Jamaican born colleagues. Very much 
inspired by the example of Martin Luther King Jr., whose activism 
and eloquence were then making world headlines, he saw the bus issue 
as typifying the particularly reactionary racial attitudes held by 
Bristol’s white establishment. 

‘This was an issue that would bring out racism. I wasn’t aware 
of the depths — it seemed so illogical to me that in London 
where people were being recruited on the buses, and indeed 
where London Transport were going recruiting in Barbados, 
that Bristol should have had a policy of having no black people 
working on the buses. . . I didn’t for a minute think I was going 

to get much opposition. Oh no, I thought, once it’s out, people 

will say, ‘this is ridiculous.’ *43 

The first thing to do was to establish once and for all that the Bristol 
Omnibus Company was operating a colour bar. This was relatively 
easy. Stephenson had an 18 year old student at one of the night school 
classes he organised who would act as a test case. Guy Bailey, the 
young man in question, was of impeccable character. He was a Boy’s 
Brigade Officer, cricket club member, a full-time warehouseman and 


15 


left to right: Audley Evans, Paul Stephenson and Owen Henry discuss the campaign. 
BRuvaning Pact 20 A AQ 


part-time student.44 Stephenson duly fixed up an interview with the 
Bus Company after establishing that there were vacancies for someone 
of Bailey’s qualifications. He then phoned back to tell them Bailey 
was West Indian, and the interview was promptly cancelled. 
Stephenson went to see the Company’s General Manager, Ian Patey, 
who affirmed that the company did indeed ban the employment of 
‘coloured labour’ on the buses. As Stephenson reminds us, this was 
then perfectly within Patey’s right. 

‘People tend to forget there were no laws against racism. ’4 

The problem was where to take it from there. Stephenson 
remembers walking on the Downs racking his brains for a bright idea. 
All of a sudden, he remembers, the idea of a bus boycott came to him 
‘like an inspiration.’ 

‘I believe that there was something that God probably, you 

know, was saying something tome...I... didn’t quite know 

what, but yet, I felt I had to do it. And I never ever throughout 

. . (the campaign) doubted that I’d win.’ 

Owen Henry remembers the announcement of their boycott plans in 
more prosaic terms. It was: 

‘... when Muhammed Ali fight Liston for the first time... And 
we had a conference in Paul’s flat and we . . . (saw the Press) at 
what was then the Triangle in Clifton. And I boarded the bus 
there and stayed at the back . . . especially for the photographers 
to take a photograph of a black person at the back of the bus.’ 

‘The back of the bus’ was where black Americans were forced to sit 
in many Southern towns in the 1960s. It was one of the issues Martin 
Luther King Jr. was fighting — by way of a bus boycott. But for 
Owen Henry in Bristol, ‘the back of the bus’ was where bus 
conductors stood. For him, it was a symbolic defiance of racial 
segregation, Bristol style. 

The Press conference and boycott were part of a wider strategy. 
Stephenson lobbied M.P.s Stan Awbery and Tony Benn for support in 
the hopes of getting the issue of discrimination raised in Parliament. 
The Council also hoped to call in the assistance of the West Indian 
National Association to which the West Indian Association was 
affiliated. They also hoped to picket St. Mary Redcliffe Church on the 
Sunday following their Press conference, and had vaguer more 
grandiose plans of a mass demonstration of West Indian bus crews 
from around the country.46 

Bill Smith must have been concerned that his years of building up 
links with the City Council would be jeopardised by such bold and 
confrontational action. Hackett felt that Bill Smith had his hands tied 
by wanting to retain the goodwill of the Council. 

‘We thought a younger person like Paul Stephenson and ourself 

could force their hand much quicker. Okay I’m not saying Bill 


EY 


Guy Bailey. 


would not have got through but it might have taken two or three 

years. The way we did it we thought, ‘it’s now or never.’ And 

we’re glad it was ‘now.’ ’ 

. we just wanted the godfathers — the City Fathers (to) know 
it’s about time. Well, maybe I wasn’t in Bristol long enough, but 
from ‘57 to ‘63 was a long time for me, anyhow.’# 

What Hackett, and presumably, Smith did not know was that the 
‘City Fathers’ who jointly administered overall bus policy with Bristol 
Omnibus, had already officially complied with the colour bar. 

In February 1962, a question raised by one Mr. Langham in a 
Council meeting was on the employment of ‘coloured labour’ on the 
buses.48 His question must have been referred to committee. For soon 
afterwards the Town Clerk invited Ian Patey to attend a mid March 
session of the Joint Transport Committee. There the company’s 
general manager justified the bar. Patey told those present that he had 
had ‘factual evidence’ that the introduction of coloured crews in other 
cities downgraded the job and caused existing (white) staff to go 
elsewhere.4? Committee member, Mr. Gailey, a Bus Company official, 

‘explained’ to the meeting that: 

‘there was now an improved employment level i in the West Indies 
and the better type of coloured labour similar to those working 
on the London Underground was not now available. ’5 
Wasn’t Guy Bailey a ‘better type’ of worker? And what of those 

pre-1963 immigrants? Had they all been snapped up by London 
Transport? And didn’t Gailey’s argument contradict the thrust of 
Patey’s contention about the destructive effects employing black 
labour had? 

Such inconsistencies did not apparently trouble the Joint Transport 
Committee with its three Aldermen, two City Councillors and five 
Company men. They decided after some discussion, not to oppose 
Patey’s colour bar. 

‘Views were expressed by several members of the Committee and 
in making reference to Mr. Patey’s statement and appreciating 
the difficulties in this matter, it was not advocated that there 
should be any change in the existing employment policy.’ 

Could this be why Bill Smith’s ‘softly softly’ approach had 
produced no results? 

The announcement of the Boycott in 1963 caught the attention of 
the Western Daily Press and the Bristol Evening Post. Bus boycotts 
may have been appropriate to King’s campaign in Montgomery 
Alabama, but surely, the papers implied, there was no cause for such 
action in Bristol! Yet when reporters questioned Patey they were 
treated to a vigorous defence of his racist employment policy. It was 
pretty much the same one he presented so convincingly to City 
Councillors and Aldermen a year before. 


19 


‘Mr. Ian Patey . . . said today the company’s policy regarding 
coloured labour had been clear for years and the action by the 
West Indians would not make them reconsider their policy. 

‘We don’t employ a mixed labour force as bus crews because 
we have found from observing other bus companies that the 
labour supply gets worse if the labour force is mixed.’ ’% 

An Evening Post editorial pointed out that to justify a colour bar 
because of the prejudice coloured labour would arouse had ‘an 
unhappy ring of convenience.’ But the Post was quick to turn on the 
busmen’s union and asked: 

‘What are trade union leaders doing to get the race virus out of 
the systems of their ranks and file... The union have had plenty 

to say about South Africa. They should take a look nearer 

home. ’53 

Transport and General Workers’ Union officials did not take kindly 
to being pilloried in public. They resented Stephenson’s approaching 
them after the Boycott was announced. They consequently closed 
ranks, and refused to meet a deputation from the West Indian 
Development Council. Arthur Coxwell of the TGWU had reportedly 
made it clear in a letter to Stephenson that: 

‘The union had no colour bar and that the decision not to 
employ West Indians had been made by the Bus Company 
alone. ’s4 

* T told him that the union had stated their view on this question 
so often that there was little point in stating it again,’ .. . This 
was the only reason why he told Mr. Stephenson there was no 

point in an interview. ’55 

Jack Hodge who was then chairman of the union branch of the 
Bristol City Busmen maintained that: 

“... It wasn’t until we read the evening press that we found that 
Guy Bailey made the approach (and had) been rejected ‘cause he 
was coloured. And then Paul Stephenson (was) coming on the 
scene... We didn’t know much about Paul as busmen but we 
suddenly find that he’s up on the television screens, up on the 
news media and all that sort of thing. Well now, he never met me 
as a branch chairman . . . and he certainly didn’t come to our 
branch to seek representation all the way through this argument. 
It was a question of the media versus the Company and the 
whole coloured sector. It did build up a bit of an anti feeling of 
Paul Stephenson, at that time, because it was being seen that 
Paul Stephenson was using some expertise which was not in 
unison with our approach. ’% 

The truth was that, at best, the union did not have an approach to 
the issue of racial discrimination. Ron Nethercott had come to office 
as South West Regional Secretary of the union in 1957, two years after 


20 


the 1955 resolution against the employment of black labour had been 
passed. He remembers the colour bar issue as a sort of hot potato 
passed onto him by his local officers in a bizarre game of political 
football. According to Nethercott: 

*.. . we were breaking new ground here. I don’t think there was 

any positive union policy on this. Well I don’t remember 

Cousins saying ‘Well this is the policy of the union,’ or the 

Executive saying, ‘this is the policy.’ There wasn’t any policy... 

It was something that had never occurred before. I mean you 

were dealing with a one off, a first situation. 

‘It wasn’t really my problem to start off with. It was the problem 

of the officer of the day . . . Arthur Coxwell .. . and a chap 

called (Cliff) Price. And I being in a sense the goal keeper of the 
union and not the centre forward, I mean I have to pick up all 
the sort of red hot potatoes whether they be on buses or docks or 
wherever they come from . . . I mean if it can’t be resolved by 
the officers in the group .. . then eventually it comes on my desk 
and I have to do the best to pick it up. So yes, it was a very odd 

problem for me because I was very much removed from buses. I 

never had anything to do with buses before! And I certainly 

never had anything to do with ‘race relations’.’s7 

Nethercott could not have been quite the political innocent he 
makes out. There may not have been a directive from the National 
Executive on ‘Race Relations’ but the union at Branch level, and more 
recently the Bristol Omnibus Company had made their position clear. 
And Nethercott himself had recently been interviewed about his 
union’s position on race discrimination in the local press!58 
Nethercott’s recollection of events seems to play down some of the 
very unbrotherly attitudes expressed by his rank and file members. 

For Nethercott and his officials then, the issue of racial justice 
instantly receded into the outfield. As the media roared its 
disapproval, the main priority became the protection of the union’s 
reputation and the defence of its members against the charge of 
racism. 

Stephenson, by contrast, did not have a union background. He had 
not been brought up, as had Nethercott, on the importance of 
working class solidarity and the triumph of Labour. Both men had 
been profoundly influenced by their Christian upbringing, but where 
Nethercott saw the burning moral issue as class inequality, Stephenson 
saw it as racial injustice. Stephenson recalls: 

‘My line was simply this: this is an employment issue, if the 
unions don’t like it they can go to Hell. What matters is the 
employer — which in this case was Patey — should say ‘we’re 
not accepting this kind of racism’ and tell the workers if they 
don’t like it they can lump it! So I didn’t see why I had to go to 


21 


the unions for it. The decision was for management! It wasa... 

moral obligation for the management!’ 

This was hardly in line with trade union principles and was bound to 
cause friction between the two camps. But over and above that, the 
union did not seem to treat the existence of racial discrimination as a 
matter of urgency. Consider Nethercott’s version of events: 

‘Arthur Coxwell came to me and said we had a problem on the 

buses and I said, ‘What’s it all about?’ ‘Oh,’ he said, ‘it’s about 

taking on coloured labour.’ 

‘Well,’ I said, ‘what is the problem?’ 

‘Well,’ he said, ‘we’re being accused of racial prejudice or our 
members are because they won’t work with coloured people.’ 

‘Well, I must say, I think I’ve got to say this, I’ve always 
believed it and I honestly believe it and I'll believe it to my dying 
day, (it was taken) out of all proportion. I think it was a thing 
that we could have resolved very quickly in this city, but I think 
situations grew upon situation which, no doubt about it, the 
local Press enjoyed it. Without doubt it was a field day for them. 

I mean honestly, they played this thing up so it became a major 

issue, crisis. . .759 

Jack Hodge, also blamed the media for making needless trouble. It 
is indicative of the TGWU’s deep seated defensiveness that Hodge felt 
reporters should not have spoken to individual members without first 
getting the union’s permission! 

T’ll make it quite clear that as far as I was concerned, I would 
not make any representation to the Branch that opposed any 
intake of coloured workforce into the Bristol Omnibus 

Company. I do know that there was a tremendous trend by both 

the Independent Television Section and the BBC on television 

and the radio, that went deliberately out of their way to try and 
select people, drivers and conductors, females, you name it, on 
bus stops. They deliberately introduced discussion with drivers, 
conductors, female drivers, female conductors on their reaction 

to the colour problem and that was done completely without the 

authority of the branch!’ 

By contrast, Stephenson had, for the moment at least, much easier 
relations with the Press and he knew how to exploit them well. The 
proposed Boycott got front page coverage in the Jamaican paper The 
Gleaner, and was reported in the major national dailies. Claudia 
Jones also covered the story in her paper The West Indian Gazette.© 

One of Stephenson’s most important publicity coups was to obtain 
the world famous cricketer, Sir Learie Constantine, as an ally. On the 
eve of the big cricket match between Gloucestershire and the West 
Indies in Bristol, Sir Learie strode onto the pitch. In his official 
capacity as High Commissioner for Trinidad and Tobago, he wrote to 


22 


go's sod Buu] “OPAB TL “HV AW Puu Cpjop) YON T 
‘IK CY AY JO Saanjeudis oyy AutpoopjoOo uses ory ‘1977 KTS 
JQZeET SSI JOP UoTsenb Ieq-anopva snq Sos} Uo UdTy 
-Iyod & UBS “[OJSIIg, ‘puNo Ar) AZUNO IY} Fe SOPPUY 38944 IYI 


“ 


PUR JITYS1IjSIINO}) UIMJoG YoEU $,AEpO, 7B $.10}e79dS 


the Bristol Omnibus Company about their refusal to have black crews, 
and he dispatched an official to Bristol to ‘make informal enquiries 
into the dispute.’6' Stephenson then informed the Press, with an 
insousiance that must have set Nethercott’s teeth on edge, that the 
West Indian Development Council might invite Sir Learie to arbitrate 
between the company, the West Indians and the Transport and 
General Workers’ Union. 

We need to remember that Commonwealth diplomats carried more 
clout in British affairs than perhaps they do today. Their actions were 
certainly more newsworthy. For the cherished ideal that 
Commonwealth members should enjoy the same rights and status as 
native born British subjects, though recently challenged by the 1962 
Immigration Act, was not to be discarded until 1971. 

White liberal opinion was also roused to action by the Press 
revelations of the colour bar. On the first of May, a hundred or so 
University students marched on both the bus staiton and the TGWU 
headquarters at Transport House.® Nethercott was reportedly 
‘furious.’ He told the marchers: 

‘We don’t want discrimination and we don’t like it. There is no 
question of a colour bar as far as we are concerned. Without 
consulting the Regional Committee, Iam prepared to say that if 
there are coloured workers on the buses, our people will accept 

them, ’6 

The demonstrators came from a loose coalition of left/liberal 
groups similar to those associated with anti-racism today. They were 
mainly members of the University Liberal and Labour clubs, CNDers 
and the (now defunct) CARD (Campaign Against Racial 
Discrimination). Nethercott called them ‘sincere but very 
misinformed.’6 

The pressure on Nethercott intensified when on the day after the 
protest, he and the union’s Regional Chairman, Desmond Brown, 
went to meet the Town Clerk and representatives of the Jamaican 
High Commissioner.*’ The union and city officials must have been 
particularly embarrassed to read that same evening the banner head- 
line in The Bristol Evening Post: 


‘BRISTOL BUS CREW BACK THE BOSS’ ® 


The next morning, the Western Daily Press headline quoted the 
busmen’s declaration: 


‘WE WON’T WORK WITH WEST INDIANS’ 


Both The Post and the Western Daily Press and the two local 
television networks made much of rank and file opposition to 


24 


Ga a we ee Se eewerreE 


‘uolyesuOWAp JuSpNIS 


‘Inoge] PsiNojod 
jO juawAojduia ay} jo js0d 
-dns Ur spavorsd Yu 91},Uad 
ayy, ssorve apeaed sjuapnyg 


Nethercott’s ‘no colour bar’ stand. According to one report: 
‘Bristol’s busmen made it clear yesterday that they do not want 

to work with West Indians. They heckled a procession of anti- 

colour bar marchers as it passed through the city centre. And 

bus driver Ted Neale told me last night: ‘The Transport and 

General Workers’ Union is wrong in thinking we will support 

the West Indians.’ ‘Mr. Ron Nethercott is barking up the wrong 

tree in thinking there is no opposition over employing coloured 
labour.’ ‘If it came to a paper vote I think the majority of the 
bus crew members would reject the move.” 

Lawrence Lindo, Jamaica’s High Commissioner tartly observed 
from London that staff shortages did not seem to alter the position of 
those supporting the colour bar: 

*.. . lt would appear that Bristol is now openly saying that it 
prefers to have an inadequate transport service rather than 
employable and qualified workers from among Commonwealth 

citizens, 77! 

As Bristol bus crews apparently dug in their heels, the big guns of 
Labour rolled in. Tony Benn, then M.P. for Bristol South East, 
declared his support for the boycott: 

‘I shall stay off the buses, even if I have to find a bike!’ 

Fenner Brockway, Labour M.P. for Eton and Slough, prepared to 
table a question about the colour bar to the Tory Transport Minister.73 
And most newsworthy of all, the leader of the Labour Opposition, 
had been rallied, by Benn, to the cause. On the 2nd of May, The Post 
headlines proclaimed; 


‘NOW WILSON JOINS THE COLOUR BAR FRAY’ 


Wilson, it seemed, had told an anti-apartheid rally in London that: 
‘The last example of the colour bar (in Britain) is now being 
operated by the Bristol Omnibus Company.”74 
This admittedly over-optimistic assessment did not obscure the fact 

that Wilson lent his full support for the boycott. The story had gone 
truly ‘national’: 
‘T’m glad that so many Bristolians are supporting the campaign 
to get it abolished. We wish them every success. ”75 
Even with the City Council there was the odd left wing renegade 
ready to make trouble. On the 2nd of May, that redoubtable old lefty, 
the Alderman Henry Hennessey spoke out against the collusion he 
alleged existed between Patey and the union over the colour bar. 
Hennessey’s remarks must have been particularly mortifying as he was 
a member of the Joint Transport Committee.” 

The very next day, this veteran socialist, who had served on the 
Council for over 40 years, faced expulsion from his own Labour 
Group within the Council.77 The official reason was his outspoken 


26 


remarks about housing policy. But the timing of this threat against 
him makes one suspect that his remarks on race must have also 
angered his increasingly right wing Labour colleagues. 

The response of the Eastville buscrews to all this was to threaten a 
walk out if black labour was employed and to: 

‘withold their voluntary contribution to Labour Party Funds as 

a protest against yesterday’s intervention by Mr. Harold Wilson 

and Mr. A. W. Benn,’’8 

And what of the Press itself? The Western Daily Press wanted it 
both ways. The colour bar might be ‘shocking, disgusting and 
degrading,’ according to an early editorial, but why not impose a bit 
of racial segregation to put things right? 

‘White men will never take kindly to working under coloured 
men. This is wrong but it is inescapable. The solution obviously is to 
have sections in which coloured and white folk work apart so 

that the coloured man has a fair chance of promotion. 79 

This ‘separate but equal’ principle had underpinned racial 
segregation in the Southern USA since 1896. It had proved to be a 
good deal more ‘separate’ than ‘equal’! Just as Martin Luther King 
Jr. was waging his historic campaign against segregation, here was the 
Western Daily Press trying to initiate it in Bristol! 

The Evening Post was not so clumsy. Its editor urged negotiation: 

‘This is a time for Cool Heads. We want no Little Rock in 

Bristol, *80 

Now, ‘Little Rock’ a town in Arkansas, the deep South of America, 
had become a symbol of racism and conflict. In 1957, the state 
governor, one Orvel E. Faubus, had acted to stop the desegregation of 
schools which had been ordered after a Supreme Courtruling. Faubus 
had sent 200 armed troops to stop nine black cir from attending 
the city’s all-white high school. The vision of children being turned 
back by troops and threatened by a howling and dangerous white mob 
was hardly comparable, either in scale or intensity, to what was 
happening in Bristol. But while critics might dismiss the comparison 
altogether as an example of Press sensationalism, others might argue 
that there were parallels. They might contend that the unfairness of 
Patey’s stance and the unexpectedly vociferous demonstration of 
some white bus crews could just possibly develop into something very 
nasty indeed. In any case, it is interesting to see how events outside 
Britain helped to shape Bristolians’ perceptions of their own internal 
affairs. 

Public sentiment had been further inflamed that Wednesday, the 
3rd of May, when local television covered the story.8! Busmen and 
buswomen were interviewed and their views were, for the most part, 
unashamedly hostile to the introduction of black personnel. The 
blatantly racist sentiments that were broadcast must have shocked 


27 


many viewers. 

Ron Nethercott, by this time, felt himself to be a man under siege. 
As he saw it, the West Indians and the Media were pulling him one 
way, the busmen another. Worst of all, his union colleagues seemed 
content to leave him to face the hostilities on his own. 

‘I felt very lonely .. . I had nowhere to turn, nowhere to go for 
advice. The only advice I was getting was from anonymous 

filthy abusive letters and from the Press. ’82 

Paul Stephenson, who was also getting abusive letters, was busy 
rallying his troops. He could not reap the full advantage he had hoped 
for from the big match on Saturday. The West Indies team had 
refused to give public support to the boycott (on the now familiar 
grounds that sport and politics didn’t mix),83 but their tour manager, 
Berkely Gaskin was photographed in a friendly pose with Stephenson 
and accepted his invitation to meet with the local West Indian 
community.%4 Then at the match itself, Sir Learie, who was present, let 
reporters know of his opposition to the Bus Company’s policy in no 
uncertain terms. During the game, the largely white membership of 
C.A.R.D. had been distributing leaflets urging cricket fans to support 
the bus boycott.8s 

Ron Nethercott was involved with his own plans that Saturday. He 
had recruited a black TGWU member, none other than Bill Smith, to 
a special meeting of his South West Regional Committee.% Nethercott 
knew Smith personally, in fact he was the first and only West Indian 
person he knew at the time.87 Because Smith had acted as an informal 
liaison man between the West Indians in Bristol and the City Council, 
and because he urged a more conciliatory approach than Stephenson, 
he was considered a ‘responsible person’. 

After a two and a half hour meeting, Smith was persuaded to sign a 
statement with the union which called pointedly for ‘sensible and, 
quiet negotiations’ on the bus issue. For its part, whilst, ‘reaffirming 
the union’s national policy of opposing racial discrimination in any 
form,’ the union publicly accused Stephenson of, ‘jeopardising the 
welfare of the city’s coloured citizens,’ and deplored, ‘the situation 
which has arisen as a result of Mr. Stephenson’s campaign.’8s The 
TGWU statement upheld instead: 

‘the reasonable approach made by Mr. Bill Smith of the Bristol 
West Indian Association, and we consider him to be the 
spokesman of the West Indian population and not Mr. 

Stephenson. ’89 

More criticism of Stephenson soon followed. It appears to have 
been orchestrated and marks the beginning of the end of his brief 
honeymoon with the local Press. 

A report for example was dredged up revealing that Stephenson’s 
employers, the Bristol Youth Committee, had ‘carpeted’ Stephenson 


28 


Bill 


for using its offices as a Headquarters for the boycott campaign.% 
And more seriously, the leaders of the Bristol Council of Christian 
Churches, Dr. Oliver Tomkins the Bishop of Bristol and the Rev. J. 
Newton, president of the free Church Federal Council also appeared 
to repudiate Stephenson and the West Indian Development Council: 
‘We seriously regret that what may prove to be an extended 
racial conflict . . . has apparently been created by a small group 
of West Indians professing to be representative. We also deplore 
the apparent fact that social and economic fears on the part of 
some white people should have placed the Bristol Bus Company 

in a position where it is most difficult to fulfil the Christian ideal 

of race relations .. .’9! 

How interesting that the West Indian Development Council is 
blamed for creating conflict, especially when the Church itself had 
been so ineffectual in its opposition to longstanding discrimination on 
the buses. How interesting too, that the clerics imply that Patey would 
be willing to lift the colour bar if only his truculent workers would let 
him. As we shall later see, Sir Learie was soon to call the Company’s 
bluff. 

In the Daily Herald an article was published in which Nethercott 
personally impugned Stephenson’s character and motives, calling him 
‘dishonest’ and ‘irresponsible.’ Nethercott claims this was done in a 
moment of anger, after being remorselessly egged on by the Press: 

‘I mean you talk about persecution, literally I had a period of 
persecution with (the) Press ringing me up and making all sorts 
of comments about what Mr. Stephenson had said about me etc. 
and... you do get very angry .. . I was angry with what the 

Daily Herald were telling me and I said, ‘I’m sorry I have to tell 

you he’s a liar.’ And that was it. . . the Daily Herald published it 

and it’s wrong to call somebody a liar but that’s how I felt at the 
moment in time and that’s a genuine emotion. I mean I’m flesh 
and blood .. .’2 

In any event, Nethercott had overreached himself. Stephenson, who 
by this time was also beginning to feel ‘hounded’ by the Press sued 
him for libel and now reckons that he was the first black man to win 
such a case in the High Court. Nethercott was obliged to apologise 
and pay costs and compensation. 

But such humiliation was still in the future. There was more nearer 
to hand. As the May Day Rally in Eastville on Sunday, May the 6th, 
was to prove. There, members of the Bristol Trades Council, which 
was a good deal more right wing than it is today, personally lobbied 
TGWU officials to take a more energetic stand against the colour bar. 
Critical comments about the union’s position were also made from the 
platform and as one Trades Council member who was there at the 
time remembers: 


30 


‘.. . there was a great deal of barracking of the TGWU. You see, 
the mass of the people who turn out on May Day tend to be left 
wing activists and it was a big turn out... The TG@WU appeared 

in a very poor light because they had a mass demonstration of 

local people here criticising them in public. ’% 

According to The Gleaner, the rally passed a resolution reaffirming 

‘... our belief in the brotherhood of man regardless of race, colour 
or creed.’95 

Few, if any West Indian activists were at Eastville, but were instead 
attending what may well have been the first black led march against 
racial discrimination in Britain. The numbers were small. Estimates 
vary between 45 and 200 men and women. Peter Carty, who had 
recently been recruited by Stephenson into the West Indian 
Development Council remembers: 

“... we get out up to City Road one day and we have a march to 

the end of the road, but we then decide to march to Redcliffe 

Church... and we... get up there and stand out there at the 

side of the road and have our protest. ’% 

Nearly all the people on that march were black working people. 
Carty, a Barton Hill Bakery worker welcomed the opportunity to do 
something about the Bus Company’s discrimination which, he 
explained, had affected several of his friends. Other people in the 
West Indian community were less enthusiastic. ‘Will James’ felt the 
boycott idea was unrealistic since West Indians were usually 
dependent on public transport to get the work. Others, according to 
Roy Hackett were more fearful: 

*.. . some black people think we should not ripple the water.’ 

Paul Stephenson was disappointed that one pastor of a large black 
congregation who had planned to lead his flock on the march changed 
his mind at the last minute. Yet the same pastor let the Council use 
church rooms for meeting without charge.” 

Overall, there does seem to have been a marked reluctance on the 
part of most West Indians to be actively involved. Roy Hackett 
maintains that West Indians feared victimisation: 

‘... they were afraid somehow . . . because of their jobs. They 

think because they are few in numbers, if their bosses who see 

them on TV or in the paper, The Evening Post would’ve carried 

a headline to say, ‘Well so and so had been demonstrating 

against the buses,’ they think they would have had the sack. 

Although I had a job just like everybody, all of us havea job, ... 

but if somebody’s not prepared to do something so that the rest 

can benefit then life would never be worth living at all.’ 

But Hackett, Stephenson and Henry also lay the blame on the 
political quietism of the West Indian churches. Owen Henry speaks 
for all of them when he states: 


31 


*. . . I find that most of the black religious people look at 
organisation work as politics and they don’t want to be involved 

in politics. I think I’ll have to disagree with them because as far 

as my understanding is concerned, anywhere where more than 

two or three people meets to discuss a problem is politics.’ 

Stephenson greatly regretted that he was unable to involve the 
churches: 

“. . . because, you see, I knew it was the black churches that 
helped, that’d given Luther King in the South that power. And 
so I was working on the black churches. I didn’t expect much 
from the white churches anyhow and I got what I expected! But 

I was expecting more from the black churches... It wasn’t that 

they weren’t in sympathy with what I was doing, but they 

weren’t ready to get that involved on that social. . . and political 
level.’ 

Whatever the reasons were, it was true that the mass of the West 
Indian community did not come out actively in support of the 
boycott. But this did not mean they opposed the campaign against the 
colour bar in principle. 

*... mentally they (the West Indians) support the idea but not to 
say they were gonna get involved and stop taking the buses. ’% 

The move to isolate Paul Stephenson (and the West Indian 
Development Council) as umnrepresentative was taken not by 
hardliners like Patey and the ‘hawks’ of the Eastville Depot. Rather it 
was the strategy (either instinctive or planned) of ‘wets’ like 
Nethercott and the Bishop of Bristol. It is likely that the city’s Labour 
clique led by Ald. Wally Jenkins also preferred the more ‘amenable’ 
Bill Smith to the abrasive young Stephenson. Smith was a ‘gradualist’ 
who would agree with the Council on the necessity of patient 
negotiation.» Stephenson by contrast had, in their view, acted like a 
bull in a china shop, trampling on the protocol, smashing civic 
complacencies and upsetting the customers. Because they could not 
understand his passion, they suspected only the worst of his motives. 

So with the best of intentions and an imperial arrogance, the 
churches and the union leadership attempted to identify the ‘true’ 
leader for the West Indians in Bristol. Nethercott refused Paul 
Stephenson’s offer to meet him, on the grounds that he was 
‘unrepresentative’.!0 In truth, there were no groups or leaders who 
could claim the loyalty, trust and allegiance of what was a politically 
unorganized migrant population. But as one critic observed, 

‘it was nonsense to describe a group of West Indians as 
unrepresentative when no representative West Indian body 

existed, *101 

In any case, it was hardly the place of a white trade unionist, whose 
contact with West Indians had been limited to one individual, to 


32 


pronounce on which individual was the legitimate leader of that 
community. 

This may well be why, aside from some probable lobbying by 
Development Council members, Bill Smith’s own organization, the 
West Indian Association publicly called: a 

*... upon Mr. Nethercott not to use Bill Smith as a stooge in this 

affair, *102 

The efforts to isolate Stephenson and the Development Council’s 
campaign might well have been effective had it not been for Sir Learie 
Constantine’s direct and personal intervention. Constantine’s 
vigorous condemnation of the colour bar contrasted starkly with the 
Church’s_ fence _ sitting equivocation. Constantine whose 
‘constituency’ after all was West Indian, unabashedly chose to ally 
himself with the boycott and express his own moral indignation about 
the colour bar: 

‘For it to be happening in Bristol of all places is even worse when 

you remember that the West Indian sugar industry has helped, 

through the slaves sent by this country, to make Bristol great. ’\ 

Sir Learie’s meeting with the Lord Mayor did not yield dramatic 
results. (Perhaps this was because the Lord Mayor, Ald. Leonard 
Stevenson, had been a member of the Joint Transport Committee). 
Constantine seems to have taken on board the economic anxieties of 
white bus crews on overtime which Stevenson no doubt outlined to 
him. He also decided to snub Patey and go straight to the Transport 
Holding Company in London which had ultimate control over the 
Bristol Bus Company management. 19 

This seems to have put the wind up Ian Patey, for the next day he 
somewhat astonishingly denied that his company operated a colour 
bar, pointing to the presence of black cleaners and maintenance 
workers as evidence! !05 

Nethercott also seemed to be responding to mounting pressure 
against the colour bar. He told The New Statesman that: 

“.. . he had reached a stage in negotiations with the main West 

Indian Association in the city and with his own members on the 

buses when it would soon be possible to approach the company 

even though there were still white people looking for bus jobs. . . 

(Nethercott) assured me that he was on the point of success; 

success at least to the extent that the ball would be played at last 

into the company’s court. But the present crisis, he thinks has 
destroyed much of his work. ‘My 3,000 busmen have now got 
their backs to the wall through this declaration of war (by 

Stephenson). *1% 

There is a whiff of humbug about this statement, for what work had 
Nethercott been doing until Stephenson goaded him into it? By his 
own admission, he had done nothing about racial discrimination until 


33 


“ 
“32 


Sir Learie Constantine with the Lord Mayor of Bristol. 


Rate 


Evening Post 4.5.63 


the boycott was declared. 

Nethercott’s shifting position was probably attributable to some 
nobbling by the union leadership. For shortly after his meeting with 
Bristol’s Lord Mayor, Sir Learie had called on Frank Cousins, then 
the National Chairman of the Transport and General Workers’ 
Union. 

*. . . I returned to London to see Frank Cousins whom I had 

known well — and indeed had been friends with — since 

working in the Ministry of Labour. I knew his Union was 
against a colour bar... so it was clearly a matter of asking them 

to enforce their own convictions. ”1°7 

In the meantime, some unnamed Jamaican residents in Bristol had 
begun to complain that their High Commissioner was not doing 
enough to pressurise bus officials.1°’ Why, they wondered had Mr. 
Lawrence Lindo stayed in London when Sir Learie had come to 
Bristol personally to defend their interests? There is more than a hint 
in The Gleaner that Lindo resented the Trinidadian High 
Commissioner for showing him up.!0% Within two days of 
Constantine’s Bristol visit, Lindo held discussions with Sir Philip 
Warter and Sir Reginald Wilson, the chairman and director of the 
Transport Holding Company. Their meeting resulted in Water and 
Wilson disavowing Bristol’s colour bar policy. Both men gave Lindo 
their public and ‘unqualified assurance’ that their subsidiary company 
in Bristol would end its discriminatory practices. Lindo accepted that 
the Holding Company had previously issued a general policy directive 
of no discrimination but that, ‘this had been ignored in Bristol.’!!° 

Rather than forcing Patey to end the bar with a written directive, 
the Holding Company, clearly embarrassed, dispatched one of their 
senior men to Bristol to conduct ‘very delicate negotiations’ between 
Bristol Omnibus Company and the union. !!! 

Patey’s attitude was variously interpreted by the national and local 
Press. He had become the Company’s General Manager a year or two 
after the 1955 ballot forbidding black crews. Although Alderman 
Hennessey had charged him with negotiating the colour bar with the 
union, he strenuously denied it. A profile piece on Patey in the 
national Daily Sketch characterised him as an impressive, self 
confident, ‘entirely professional’ manager who manfully bore the 
responsibility for his employment policy. 

‘Mr. Patey avoids no responsibility: while other bus companies all 
over the country refused to allow coloured labour and keep quiet 
about it, Mr. Patey has brought this storm upon himself by his 
honesty and frankness.’!!2 

A New Statesman journalist was less impressed, describing Patey 
as: 

... a tall blond man who uses terms like Liberal and Labour as 


35 


if they are a little unclean.’113 

There is not enough evidence to conclude whether or not Patey was 
boxing clever and trying to sabotage the colour bar by openly 
defending it on the grounds of his employees’ prejudice. After all, it 
would be logical for him to welcome a new supply of cheap labour and 
discredit the union at the same time. 

But Patey’s statements were so patently racist, so full of contempt for 
black people, that it is likely he had a personal distaste for hiring 
‘coloured’ bus crews. In London, he alleged, ‘coloured crews’ were 
‘arrogant’ and not of sufficiently high calibre, in any case, local, i.e. 
white, men should have preference. There was also the suggestion that 
white conductresses and female passengers might be endangered by 
the presence of black crews.!!4 Evidently, it was not only Liberals and 
Labourites who were ‘a little unclean.’ 

Whatever Patey’s private feelings, he was clearly under pressure 
from London to change his policy. The papers in that first week of 
May were full of stories about black unrest elsewhere in the world. 
From America came the report that 


‘Alabama Negroes defy Police’ 115 
From Kenya, then still a British colony, came an account of: 
‘Africans’ attack on British Soldiers. ”''6 


Even closer to home, in Westminster itself, race was a major issue, 
as Fenner Brockway continued his long standing fight to introduce a 
Bill against racial discrimination to a resident Parliament.!!7 And 
Tony Benn in a prominent article published the day before Bristol’s 
Council elections, urged Western Daily Press readers to ensure their 
candidates opposed Bristol Omnibus’s colour bar.1!8 

Two editorials in the Times and the Telegraph expressed 
disapproval of the Bristol Omnibus Company’s colour bar in language 
which revealed the fears and prejudices of the editors themselves. The 
Telegraph prophesied: 

‘Such scandals of intolerance as these are not a local but an 
international danger for more and more the dark races are 
conscious of a common interest and will support one another’s 

struggles for emancipation. 7119 

The Times, speaking of the ‘colour problem,’ rather in the way 
people spoke of the ‘Jewish problem’ thirty years before, also gazed 
worriedly into the future: 

‘In general ie West Indians and the rest have come to Britain 

because there were jobs to be done which would not have been 

done otherwise. The problem their presence creates constitutes 


36 


one of those problems which will have to be solved — just as 

much as the future of the railways, or the location of industry or 

the planning of our cities — if the Britain of the coming decade 

is to be a good place to live in. ’120 

The Times editorial goes on to make the important point that 
although Britain was quick to pass a Bill restricting immigration in 
1962, (actually, the Tories were planning this from the time of the 
Notting Hill and Nottingham Riots), little positive help was extended 
to help those immigrants already in the country.!21 As a subsequent 
letter to the Times pointed out, Parliament seemed curiously unwilling 
to set its collective weight behind measures which would ban 
discrimination in public places and in employment, and which would 
forbid the incitement to racial hatred.!22 

But if Parliament still had its back to the winds of change, Patey 
knew well which way to blow. Within a week of his meeting with his 
London superior, Patey publicly appealed, with dazzling effrontery to 
‘his’ busmen for: 

‘a real gesture of goodwill in the colour bar dispute. ’123 

The TGWU seemed caught out by this startling U-turn. The 
Western Daily Press reported a surprised Cliff Price, Secretary of the 
union’s busmen’s branch admit: 

‘I did not know this statement was being issued . . .”124 

Adding immediately: 

‘T must say I agree with the sentiments expressed. *!25 

Arthur Coxwell, then the South West Organizer of the union’s 
transport section, refused to comment on this new development until 
he consulted the busmen themselves. 

Patey had scored a propaganda victory, for both local papers ended 
up congratulating him for his swift and effective response, and 
scolded union leaders for their ‘cool’ one. Patey, said the Post’s editor 
was: 

*.. quite right. Goodwill is needed more than anything else. 
‘What a pity the union response, so far at least, has given the 
impression of being cautious and reserved. A little more warmth 
and generosity of spirit would not prove nearly so lethal as some 
union leaders seem to imagine. ”!26 

For the next four months, the Company and the union were locked 
in secret negotiation. A veil was drawn over the issue both in the 
Council and the Press. Whilst all this is going on, we can consider a 
question we have so far avoided. Just what did the rank and file think 
about the employment of ‘coloured crews’? 

Were the busmen and women all virulent racists? Or were they, as 
one source charged, just a particularly, ‘bloody minded lot, more 
alienated than Russian waiters?’ Or were they as one local Communist 
claimed, merely blameless pawns whose support for the colour bar 


37 


had ‘rubbed off (on them) from the top?’!27 

Certainly the busmen and women had good reason to feel 
bloodyminded. Bus crews had suffered a relative decline in wages 
since the war, and a corresponding decline in morale. The beloved 
trams had been scrapped during the war and bus drivers, according to 
one source, were earning less than the Aerospace workers, a reversal 
of the pre-war position.!28 Both drivers and conductors were 
increasingly dependent on overtime to make ends meet: 

*.. . it (overtime) could put your wages anywhere up to two or 

three pounds (by the 1950s) which is a big thing. It was at least 

more than half your wages. °!29 

Bristol was the only large city not to have a fully municipalised bus 
service. ‘John Garrett’ felt that conditions would have been much 
better if only the city had purchased the service when it had the option 
to do so in 1937: 

‘If the Corporation had run the stuff we (the bus crews) would 

have moved outinto the N.J.A.C. (National Joint Industrial 

Council for Municipally Owned Transport Undertakings) who 

were getting better conditions including superannuation that 

would have been beneficial - - - 

. . . Instead of that they had this jointly owned undertaking 

(with Bristol Omnibus Company) . . . (and) they were allowing 

the company to run the job,’ }3 

The low pay and unsocial hours made a job on the buses 
unattractive to most Bristolians in the days of relatively full 
employment. Shifts, as one woman who worked as a conductor in the 
60s explained were: 

“... different every week, split duty, (was) 6.30-9.00 am then go 

back on (at) 11.45-2.00 pm and then back home and back to 

work again at 3.30-6.00 pm. Some were over 12 hour shifts, they 

got an hour a day extra for a double split!’ 

Just after the war, as Jack Hodge remembers: 

‘.. . there were a number of people that were engaged (by)... 

the bus company, that were of different origins. We had Poles, 

we had Germans, we had Italians, we still got them today. °132 

So why was there an unwillingness to hire black workers? 
Nethercott and Hodge are keen to play down rank and file opposition 
to black workers. Neither, when I interviewed them in 1985, 
volunteered any information about the existence of the 1955 
resolution against the employment of coloured bus crews. They 
preferred instead to pin such opposition onto an unrepresentative 
minority of their members. Hodge, for example maintains: 

‘, . . you know we always had, way back in the thirties that sort 

of minority in our own union that had been against any 

assimilation of Commonwealth workers. 7133 


38 


Ron Nethercott, like Jack Jones, his Midlands counterpart in the 
1950s, preferred to characterise the issue as a purely economic one: 
‘And this is something I could never get the Press .. . (or) the 
Bishop of Bristol at that time (1963) to understand, . . . that it 
was not about a racial problem it was about bad conditions on 
the buses, it was about low pay .. . If we’d have had an influx of 
additional crew, albeit Irish, Canadian, French, German, 
English!, the resentment would still be there. It wasn’t a matter 
of coloured people, it was a matter of taking away people’s 
ability to earn overtime to live! And this wretched thing! (The 
dispute). Nobody wanted to hear this point of view. . . Basically 
this was a problem of people’s conditions of work. Low paid 
busmen . . . were very badly paid . . . and the two or three 
pounds extra they were getting in terms of overtime was the 
difference between living . . . and existing.’ !34 
By this line of thinking, it becomes apparent that busmen and 
women at the Lawrence Hill and Eastville Depots in East Bristol 
would have felt particularly threatened by West Indian workers 
because, as most West Indians lived in the St. Paul’s and Easton 
areas, they would have been assigned to those depots. Between 1960 to 
1963, the West Indian population in Bristol had doubled to around 
7,000 people to form a very conspicuous pool of reserve labour. !35 
On the other hand, as Jack Hodge himself reveals, there was a 
severe labour shortage on the buses in 1963, due to an alarmingly high 
turnover rate: 
‘Now we had a branch of 2,000 strong, drivers and conductors. 
Our changeover of staff was working out on average at 600 per 
year, So you can appreciate that in three years we had a complete 
changeover of staff. And that was going on for years even when 
I came out of the Army, colossal. Now it was (such) a state of 
affairs that buses were coming off the road.’ 
And as Jim Cheek, who was a shop steward at the Brislington depot 
in 1963 points out: 
*.. . people were fearful of an influx of people from elsewhere, 
(on the grounds it) would be reducing their earnings potential... 
But it was unfounded of course, because we’ve always had a 
massive turnover of staff and even with the Labour market 
today, we’re still drivers short, "137 
This fearfulness cannot be explained simply in terms of the crews’ 
feelings of extreme economic insecurity. There is a territoriality about 
their response to outsiders. Perhaps it was the influx of an identifiably 
different group of people, in larger numbers than the sprinkling of 
Poles, Italians and Germans, which was exciting alarm. There is a 
West Country saying, ‘The Arabs begin at Swindon,’ the ‘A’ in ‘Arab’ 
being contemptuously pronounced like the ‘A’ in ‘Alien.’ This refined 


39 


version of ‘The Wogs begin at Calais’ expresses an intense localism 
characteristic of Bristol, a localism which has been directed against 
other out groups in the past. As one F. James wrote to the Evening 
Post during the colour bar dispute: 

‘In the late thirties, I happened to be one of a large number of 

Welshmen who through no fault of their own were forced 

reluctantly to leave their homes and find employment elsewhere. 

Most of us settled for Bristol for obvious geographical reasons. 

By and large we were received very unfavourably, partly because 

of our accent, but mainly because the Bristolian felt that he and 

he alone was entitled to work in Bristol. 

Now comes the question of coloured people obtaining 
employment on buses. Personally I am convinced that colour 
has very little bearing on the case as far as the Bristolian is 
concerned. It is simply the fact that these coloured people are 
‘outsiders.’ Whereas in the thirties, the excuse was accent, today 
it is colour, 138 ‘ 

Ron Nethercott, fiercely loyal to his Bristol members, admits on 
questioning that there might have been more than economic worries 
behind the bus workers’ attitude to black labour, but he refuses to call 
it ‘prejudice’. 

‘I’m not prepared to say they (the busmen) were prejudice(d). 

I’m prepared to say people were probably fearful of something 

they didn’t understand in the sense it was a new dimension of 

their life... Basically it came down . . . to this great fear of their 
living standards being affected.”139 

But what is at the root of this ‘great fear’? And how did Nethercott 
square his longstanding accommodation with his workers’ anti- 
immigrant stance (before 1963) with his own strongly held Christian 
principles? (Nethercott had nearly become a parson before opting for 
a union career). It seems that his solution was to deny that such fear 
implied racial prejudice. Other public figures, however, like Ronald 
Bell the Tory M.P. for Buckingham South were not so torn. 

Like Nethercott, Bell, also acknowledged the widespread ‘fear’ 
about living standards amongst the white population. But as he 
chillingly explained to the Commons debating the Immigration Bill in 
1962, in language which prefigures Thatcher’s, economic fears were 
but the tip of a racialist iceberg: 

‘Behind all is fear. Fear for standards, fear for material 
interests, fear of excessive fertility on the part of the immigrants, 
of being swamped in our own country. They (the whites) fear 

miscegenation (inter-racial marriage). 14 

Local fears about living standards were similarly grounded in racial 
stereotypes. As the following extract from an interview with two 
veterans of an East Bristol Depot in the early 60s shows: 


40 


M.D.: ‘Tell me what you remember (about the 1963 dispute).’ 

Mr. Grey:‘Well, they didn’t want the coloured people. Actually at 
the time they (coloured people) were working in Bath. But we didn’t 
exactly want them here.’ 

M.D.: ‘Tell me about the ‘we’.’ 

Mr. Grey: ‘Well, the crews, the crews on the buses. . . Actually we 
didn’t want them at all, really.’ 

M.D.: ‘What were some of the things people . . . (at the depot) were 
saying against coloured crews?’ 

Mr. Grey: ‘They said there were white people out of work that 
needed the job. But the white people, a lot of the white ones wouldn’t 
take it because of the hours. I mean it was last thing at night, first 
thing in the morning .. .’ 

M.D.: ‘What were some of the other objections you remember 
some of your colleagues saying?’ 

Mr. Grey: ‘Well, they were on about their food. Some of them 
thought they ate Kit-e-Kat!’ (Laughs). 

Mrs. Grey: ‘Some conductresses took a dim view of it about 
working with them late at nights.’14! 

‘Will James’, who came on the buses in the 60s remembers talking 
to white drivers who had been originally against black crews. 

‘And we used to have long discussions about it. I couldn’t 
understand why they didn’t want to have black people on the 
buses. And some of the reasons they gave were to me, coming 
from the West Indies were I suppose, shocking . . . And you 
know they were saying the blacks shouldn’t be on the buses 
because the passengers won’t want to take the money from you, 
don’t want to take the change from them. ’'42 

Notions that it was unclean to touch black people, that black people 
ate Kit-e-kat, that they were dangerous to white women in a working 
situation, (it was assumed the blacks recruited would be male) go 
deeper than fears of economic competition. Black people, these 
objections imply, are not quite human. They have animal habits and 
their very touch can pollute. Ignorance and suspicion take on a 
racialist dimension, a dimension tinged with unconscious superstition. 

One needs to remember what a very ‘white’ place Bristol had been 
in the early 20th century. The African slaves who had been kept as 
servants in 18th century Bristol, had long since melted into the general 
population. (It is a neat irony that some of the fairest Bristolians of 
them all might have had black ancestors). But by the 1930s there were 
only a very few black families in Bristol, probably migrants from the 
West Indies, most notably perhaps were the well known boxers, Dixie 
Green and his son. 

Beyond that, as Jack Hodge, whose sea captain father would 
occasionally invite his Lascar cook home to share their Christmas 


41 


dinner, recalls: 
‘They were in such a minority you had no occasion to, you 
know, worry about them, there was no worry, it was just a case 
of recognising them...’ 

Ron Nethercott who lived in Barton Hill had little cause to ‘worry’ 
either. ‘I literally had no dealings with our coloured friends at all. . .’ 
He goes on to relate that: 

‘The only coloured person I ever saw (as a boy) was ina film! . . 

. Paul Robeson! I can’t honestly say that in my life — I’m 

talking of when I was 13 maybe 14 — I can’t even remember 

seeing a coloured person.’ 

Later in the interview, Nethercott did remember his father chatting 
to some black sailors from Avonmouth and maintained that these 
occasional strangers were regarded more with curiosity than fear. But 
‘Tim Spring’ who lived in the more cosmopolitan area of Broadmead 
in the 1920s disagrees: 

‘.. . I lived in the Horsefair as a kiddy and we had Italians and 
there was a couple of coloured families (so) I was sort of used to 
dealing with them. But you know of course as... (‘John 
Garrett’) said there was people that hadn’t met the coloured, it 
was only natural they was going to feel strong about accepting 
them.’ 

This assumption, that it was ‘natural’ to feel ‘strong’ or fearful 
about a new group of people, begs a few questions. Had the 
upbringing and education which Bristolians received before the 1960s 
encouraged them to welcome diversity or to suspect it? Recent studies 
of education and popular culture suggest that in the late 19th and early 
20th centuries, young people were imbued with a jingoistic sense of 
their own cultural superiority over non-white peoples, even as they 
were encouraged to feel inferior to their so-called ‘betters.’ '43 

Certainly newsreels in the 1930s banned any references to poorly 
governed British colonies, Englishmen who went native, or references 
to inter-marriage, especially between black men and white women.!44 
But more work needs to be done on the actual experience of white 
Bristolians just before and after World War Two before we can 
properly assess the influence of education and popular culture on 
racial attitudes. 

What is apparent is that the arrival of black people is associated in 
many Bristolians’ minds with a general deterioration in the quality of 
urban life — a deterioration over which they have had little control. In 
the early 1960s the local papers were full of the ‘redevelopment’ of 
Barton Hill. Despite the protests of residents and community workers, 
this 19th century East Bristol neighbourhood was partially demolished 
to make way for Council tower blocks. Nethercott remembers the area 
before such change occurred: 


42 


M.D.: ‘Were there many coloured people, immigrants or non- 
English people in Bristol when you were a child? 

R.N.: ‘Not when I was a child . . . I lived in East Bristol and 
brought up there in Barton Hill which was, uh, very much a good — 
and I say this in the best (sense) cause — it’s very much still a good 
working class area — and certainly I can never remember, I mean, to 
see a coloured person was the exception rather than the rule . . . there 
was no coloured community when I was a child. 

M.D.: You said you came from a good working class (family). 
What were the values that make you say it was... good.. .? 

R.N.: Well it was like most families around East Bristol at that 
particular time. Most of them were good, we had poverty, we knew 
poverty, we knew unemployment, but we were politically motivated 
and we were about changing society. My mother would attend 
political meetings with my father, I’d go with them as a kid and sit in 
the local church hall and bait and interrupt the Tory candidate... 
they were all involved in politics but they were very honest, moral 
people... I’m talking about moral in everything that they did. There 
was nothing tainted or dishonest or nothing creepy. It was a 
community where one could trust each other. You could leave your 
front door open, leave your back door open and um, it was a lovely 
community. East Bristol was a super place. . .’!45 

Nethercott may have been idealising pre-war Barton Hill, but he is 
not alone in doing so. In recent years there have been a spate of locally 
published books of working class reminiscence. Barton Hill 
Remembers, Bedminster Between the Wars, books on old St. Paul’s, 
on St. Philips and Westbury.!4 And all recall their close knit 
communities with affectionate regard. These rememberances evoke a 
Bristol before tower blocks and the Common Market, before 
permissiveness and economic decline, and . . . before the blacks. Next 
to such shining memories, burnished by the passing years, how tawdry 
must the city now seem — like a ‘fallen woman’ on the City Road. 

It is no good pointing out that black people did not cause the decline 
of our cities, but were themselves swept along in the vortex of post war 
economic change. That they left the colonies which Bristol merchants 
had kept underdeveloped for long after the end of slavery. That they 
had grown up poorer and had been brought up more strictly than even 
those pre-war Bristolians.'47 For white working people in Bristol knew 
only that they felt powerless to stop the changes in their lives that the 
government made. They couldn’t stop the High Rise flats from 
flattening Barton Hill or the foreigners from invading St. Paul’s. For 
the most part, when they had time to think about these things at all, 
they saw in the new immigrants, not folks like themselves, just trying 
to survive, but a new and threatening burden imposed from on high. 
Class consciousness, a sense of ‘them and us’, did not exist in an 


43 


unalloyed form. It had been transformed by the base metals of local 
chauvinism and racial prejudice. 

Yet the colour bar issue did provoke one of the largest mailbags the 
Evening Post had ever received.'48 Many whites were against the 
colour bar, and not all of them were, as some might suspect, middle 
class ‘trendies’ from Clifton. In fact there was a curious alliance 
between working class ‘Johnny Bulls’ and ‘Old Colonials’ from the 
posher parts of town, against employing black people. These ranged 
in tone from the purely economic and anti-foreigner to the explicitly 
racist. 

A resident from the Albany Road, Montpelier, an area attracting 
West Indians from nearby St. Paul’s maintained: 

*... colour has nothing whatever to do with the matter. The fact 
is the Government has permitted tens of thousands of people 
from many other lands to drift over for an easy living. ’149 
A contributor from the more middle class area of Westbury-on- 
Trym spoke in a similar vein: 
‘T have no bar but a Foreign Bar. That is European, including 
Southern Irish, all crowding into this country either claiming our 
jobs or our National Insurance and enjoying the labour 
conditions other people born in this country have fought for. 150 
Such sentiments ignored the thousands of black servicemen and 
women who fought in the war for Britain, nor did it admit that cheap 
colonial labour had in part enabled the British working class to better 
their standard of living. But it is not as specifically racist as this classic 
contribution from an ex-colonial lady retired in Redland: 

‘I was born and bred in the West Indies, lived there 35 years and 

I can tell you that the black man still has a long way to go before 

he can claim to be really civilised. Fundamentally they are still 

children. They panic easily, do not know the true meaning of 
gratitude and become extremely officious when put in positions 
of authority. I have nothing against them and would be glad to 
employ one as a gardener orihousemaid, but I shall be sorry to 

see them infiltrating our public services. ’151 

It was not only the middle class who had reaped the benefits of 
Empire. A bus conductor from the Staple Hill depot had lived a life of 
relative ease while serving in the Forces abroad. He was, he told the 
Post: 

*. . . quite content to have my meat bought from a coloured 

butcher and cooked by my coloured servant for myself, wife and 

children (and a good cook he was too).’!52 

But, he confessed, he had been angered by the singling out of the 
Bristol Omnibus Company for what was a virtually universal practice. 
Undaunted by logic, he decided in protest to oppose the employment 
of black bus crews. 


44 


The anti-colour bar letters fall in two main camps: those who fully 
support Stephenson’s campaign and those who repudiate his tactics in 
favour of those of Bill Smith’s. 

The pro-Smith contingent argued that: 

*. . . focusing the issue through protest marches and boycotts 
will increase rather than diminish friction between the races, "53 
and that 

“.. . the more patient approach of Mr. Smith is the correct 
one. If there is prejudice in Bristol it will not disappear 

overnight, *154 

Several themes run through those letters which condemned the 
colour bar in less qualified terms. Bristol’s commuters could be very 
rude about their bus service, accusing the crews of being ‘indolent’ 
and impolite, and complaining generally of poor service. The letters 
some correspondents wrote used the threat of coloured labour to exact 
better standards from the bus crews. This was not an approach 
guaranteed to promote racial harmony, but understandable given the 
severe understaffing on the buses. This letter from St. Anne’s Park is 
typical: 

‘As a mother of two young children who has to take a push chair 
when I go shopping, I wait in trepidation to see whether the 
conductor will be one of the very helpful ones who will step 
down and pick up the pushchair for me, or one of the gum- 
chewing, stare-straight-ahead brigade who have to be asked to 
move out of the way of the luggage space so that I can struggle 

to put it away myself. If two independent justifiable complaints 

are received against any bus crew they should be sacked and 

their jobs given to coloured workers. ’'55 

Christian social conscience prompted other readers to bear witness 
against what they saw as a moral wrong. This could put them at odds 
with the established churches as this extract shows. Here the writer is 
taking The Bristol Council of Christian Churches to task for 
dismissing Paul Stephenson as unrepresentative. 

‘Christ and His disciples also were a small group and regarded as 
unrepresentative by the establishment of their time. Can any 
Christian doubt what Christ’s attitude to racial discrimination 
would have been?’156 

Some letter writers were worried about England drifting into the 
type of prejudice ‘rife in South Africa’ or ‘the Southern states of the 
USA . . . which are a blight on the name of civilisation.’!57 Others 
cited the skill and kindness of West Indian nurses, or remembered the 
contribution of the West Indian and Indian soldiers during World 
War Two: 

‘If these people are fit to fight alongside in times of aggression 
then surely they are fit to work beside us. *138 


45 


Bristol’s slaving heritage provided another theme. Colston’s name 
was invoked by an African resident, and in one of several pro-boycott 
letters from the new Council estate at Hartcliffe: 

‘Edward Colston, famous in this city was a slave trader. He split 
up loved ones. Families never saw one another after he passed 
their way. We should be grateful that these dark people should 

work with us. 7159 

It is hard to tell which views are the most representative of white 
Bristolian opinion. Was it merely a few ‘famous sportsmen, noisy 
students and minority churchgoers’ who supported the West Indian 
Development Council’s campaign as one Redfield resident charged? 160 

Admittedly, it was outsiders like Tony Benn, Julia Gaitskell, 
Anthony Lester who figured most prominently among Stephenson’s 
white supporters. Benn was a longstanding member of the Movement 
for Colonial Freedom whose Bristol Council called an all party 
meeting on the eve of negotiations to press for an end to the colour 
bar, and the integration of, ‘Bristol’s immigrants into the full life of 
the community.’!6! Certainly Bristol University lecturers like Ronald 
Sampson and Professor H. Dickinson and John Malos identified 
publicly with the boycott. So too did other local left wingers inside 
and outside the Council including Alderman St. John Reid, Cllr. J. 
Boss, Don McLaren, The Rev. Vivian Thomas and TGWU member 
and long-time activist, J. E. Flowers.!62 The local Communist Party 
vigorously campaigned during the Council Election against the colour 
bar.'6 There was also a petition against racial discrimination 
circulated by a youth worker in Hartcliffe which a number of busmen 
signed. 164 

There is a Liberal or Lib-Lab thread running through many of the 
letters from the anti-discrimination camp. Tolerance, individual 
freedom, civil liberties these are valued most by those whose common 
sense view of the world is based on liberal principles. 16 

Not everyone valued these principles so highly. A more 
authoritarian strain also echoed through the Post’s letter page. Some 
urged deportation of black immigrants from ‘this land of housing 
problems and unemployment’.'% The fact that some black people, like 
Stephenson, were not immigrants but British born had not, evidently, 
yet occurred to everyone. And even local socialists did not always 
acknowledge the rights of those West Indians already settled in Britain 
to stay: 

‘The vast majority of the homogenous Bristolians, I would say, 
do see the apparent ‘injustice’ of the bus company’s ban, but 
this sympathy would certainly evaporate should the West Indian 

Development Council force their will on behalf of our uninvited 

guests. 

‘My constructive advice to the West Indian Development 


46 


Council is: Hold your peace until British Socialism’s ‘Winds of 

Change’ enable the West Indians to return to a prosperous and 

welcoming West Indian Federation. 187 

It may be that the majority of Bristolians were not overly concerned 
about the bus boycott. Perhaps such political issues only commanded 
the attention of a committed minority. Such apathy however, if it 
were the norm, does imply a passive compliance with racial injustice. 

What is certain is that racialist ideas were widespread and not 
confined to any one class. Equally true is the fact that some white 
Bristolians were prepared to speak out publicly against the colour bar. 

On the 28th of August 1963, 150,000 black and white Americans 
marched on Washington in the, ‘biggest civil rights demonstration the 
nation has ever seen.’ 

‘President Kennedy today called on the American people to 

accelerate their effort to achieve equal rights for all citizens. "8 

In Bristol, on that same day, it was reported that the colour bar on 
Bristol’s buses had ended. After months of negotiation and a union 
meeting the previous night attended by 500 of the city’s 1,750 bus 
crews, agreement had been reached for ‘the employment of suitable 
coloured workers as bus crews.’'69 

‘There will now be complete integration without regard to race, 
colour or creed. The only criterion will be the person’s suitability for 
the job,’ said Mr. Ian Patey, the company’s general manager.1!70 

Arthur Coxwell for the union, angrily denied that his members had 
ever passed a resolution banning black workers. The bar had been the 
company’s policy, not a union one: 

‘it had been a rigid (union) rule for many years that there should 

be no discrimination against coloured men,’'7! 

Adding, in a statement reported by the Guardian but not by the 
local Press that: 

‘If one depot passed a resolution it did not mean it would be 

endorsed higher up.’'72 

Patey did not disagree with Coxwell’s assessment but charged that 
the public campaign of the previous May ‘had delayed the opening of 
negotiations with the union.’ This seemed rather a strange point to 
make since Patey himself admitted that: 

‘.. « Negotiations with the union had started only when a 

directive had been received from the London offices of the 

parent company. ’!73 
And as we have seen, the London Company was moved to action 
precisely because of the protests and public meetings. 

Still, the settlement of the bus dispute was widely reported in 
the National Press and gained the grateful expression of thanks 
from Paul Stephenson on behalf of the West Indian 
Development Council. Ten ‘coloured applicants’ were soon to 


47 


be interviewed for the post of conductor.174 The union had saved 

face and the battle against the colour bar had been won. 

But had it? There are no available records of the details of the 
settlement. But certain things do not seem to make sense. 

It seemed odd, for one thing, that after all the aggro of the past few 
months, the Transport House meeting of the bus crews had gone so 
smoothly. There had been, we are told: 

‘no criticism of the proposed agreement and few dissenters. ”!75 

It seemed odd too, that Patey still maintained there was no labour 
shortage on the buses. 176 

Could the memory of one former branch official be correct when he 
recollected that: 

‘the upshot of the thing was that it was agreed that 5% of the 
staff could be engaged as (coloured) conductors. ’!77 

In other words, had the union and the company negotiated, not an 
end to the colour bar, but the institution of a racial quota? Could this 
be why more than two years after the end of the dispute, there were 
only four drivers and 39 conductors from ethnic minorities, less than 
two 1/2% of Bristol’s total bus crew?!70 Or was it as Jack Hodge 
maintains, due to the difficulty of finding suitable black candidates? 
If candidates were in such short supply, why did another employee of 
the Company assert that the quota was raised to 6% by the early 70s? 

In the absence of hard evidence we can, as they say, only speculate. 

Who were the lucky immigrants who obtained a job on the buses 
and how did they get on? Patey had announced that the main 
qualifications for conductors were: 

‘ @ head for figures, a knowledge of the city and good 
references, *!79 

These would be required of coloured applicants the same as 
whites... Patey had also told reporters well before any Bristol 
applicants had been interyiewed that a ‘large percentage of the 
latter (i.e. coloured applicants) . . . were often found 

unsuitable’, 180 

But even Patey could not have found much fault with Bristol’s first 
‘coloured’ conductor, Raghbir Singh. For a start, Singh was not West 
Indian and perhaps it was thought that hiring an Indian rather than a 
West Indian would cock a symbolic snook at the West Indian 
Development Council. Be that as it may, Singh certainly had a head 
for figures, having studied maths along with geography, English, art 
and history at college in the Punjab. He had come to England in 1959 
whilst in his 30s, largely to ensure his children secured ‘a good English 
education.’ He settled with a friend in Bristol, because it was a 
university town and used the capital he had from his shoe business in 
Amritsar to buy a part interest in a house in Clifton. Then he brought 
over his wife and children, working first as a building labourer in 


48 


€9°6'LI ISO SUIUSATUOSTIA, JOSOY “APL JOALIP YIM JOJONPUOD YorIq ISAT $,[OISLIG YsUIG MQyusey 


> ] 


Redcliffe, then as a machinist in Eastville and finally as a semi-skilled 
fitter in Stapleton. Singh decided to apply for the post of bus 
conductor even though it meant a substantial cut in wages: 

‘T wanted to see how true they are in this saying . . . whether they 

give this job to the ethnic minorities . . . let us see how they fulfil 

their promises. But they liked me and I liked them.’ 

Singh’s appointment, reported, he told me, in at least one 
newspaper in India was a landmark indeed. For, ironically, the 
Company appointed a man who wore a turban. The right of Sikh 
busmen to wear beards and turbans had resulted in a number of 
racially inspired disputes in the Midlands.!8%2 But here was Bristol 
inadvertently, one suspects, helping to blaze the trail for religious 
freedom: 

‘Last night,’ (a wide eyed Western Daily Press revealed), ‘he (Singh) 
was wearing a blue turban. ‘It goes with my uniform. If I wear a 
brown suit I have on a brown turban’.’!83 

A few days after Singh’s arrival, four more black conductors took 
their places on Bristol’s buses. Norman Samuels and Norris Edwards 
were Jamaicans; Mohammed Raschid and Abbas Ali were from 
Pakistan.!8 The white driver who took on Norris Edwards as his 
conductor, did so, his wife explained, because no one else at the depot 
would work with him. The driver’s attitude was initially one of 
resignation rather than enthusiasm though he soon grew friendly with 
Norris: 

‘In any case, I thought, well it’s got to come, it might as well be 

me, got to live with it, can’t stop it.’ 

There was, so far as one can gather from the evidence available, no 
outburst of organized open hostility on the part of the white bus crews 
towards the black ones. According to one conductress: 

‘We never worried if they were black, white, coloured or what, 

we never took any notice . . . I think they were more or less 

accepted after the first couple of weeks. 

But as one Lawrence Hill busman remembers: 

; . there was that little resentment that was against the 

coloured people. Every job, any job there was that resentment; 

it was entirely foreign to our nature. You see, you now have 

grown up where coloured people are accepted. But we weren’t.’ 

‘There was,’ this same busman says, ‘the odd incident between 
someone who was violently anti-coloured,’ for example: 

*... They’d talk disparagingly about them didn’t (they)... in 

the canteen.’ 


Or, 
‘They might hear occasionally the word ‘nigger’ used but very 
rarely .. . but invariably that was done amongst ourselves... 


They’d (other white crews) do it jokingly sometime.’ 


50 


One white conductress recalls: 

‘You went in for your meals but you never sat with them. Well, 
you just didn’t did you, just sat with the other women and had 
our tea and the (white) men sat with the (white) men... But you 
don’t know what to talk about with them, do you.’ 

A woman who came on to the Eastville depot in 1964 confirmed 
that: ; 

‘There was a lot of conductresses wouldn’t work with them 

(‘coloureds’) at all. They used to change over with me. ’Cause I 

never bothered, you know, if he was coloured, he was coloured.’ 

And another conductress admitted: 

‘I know the first time I ever worked with a coloured fellow, I was 

a bit nervous, ’cause it was a late turn. But he was very nice. 

West Indian, I think.’ 

While some white drivers were friendly and polite, others reportedly 
sent their black conductors to Coventry. One Jamaican conductor of 
the time remembers his driver sitting in his cab during the stopovers 
reading his paper and never addressing a word to him. The sense of 
hurt and exclusion such incidents must have caused those who 
suffered them was simply not taken in by the white bus crews I 
interviewed. 

The general view among the white bus crew I interviewed seemed to 
be that the ‘coloured crews’ (or ‘darkies’) settled without too much 
‘fuss or bother.’ 

As time passed, black bus crews were increasingly accepted, and it 
was resented when black crews did not adapt more wholeheartedly to 
the subculture of the buses. 

‘Tim Spring’, who organised social events at one depot, resented 
what he perceived to be the lack of participation by black crews in 
such events. He felt that 

‘... if there was any bar at all put up, it was done by the black 
people, and not us,’ 

Another busman concurred and suspected a conspiracy at work: 

‘To my view, the leaders of those different communities said 
don’t cohabit with the whites anymore than you’ve got to, 
except at work.’ 

‘Mrs. Regent’, a conductress at the time had a more sympathetic 
interpretation: : 

M.D.: ‘They didn’t mix as much with the whites?’ 

Mrs. Regent.: ‘No, I think they kept themselves apart a bit. Course 
I suppose more or less that was a bit of being on the nervous side you 
know. Didn’t know perhaps how they would be accepted.’ 

One Jamaican crew member dismissed both the conspiracy theory 
or the fear of rejection theory. Neither explained why he had not gone 
to the bus crew’s club more often than he did. 


St 


Four of Bristol’s first black conductors. Western Daily Press 18.9.63 


‘When I finish working, I don’t want to hear about the job, And 
this is the thing that is set in the club is the talk is about buses all 
night! (Laughs) I don’t call it a social evening at all, talking 
about buses, the colour of buses, the number of buses. To me if 

I go out somewhere to enjoy myself I go to listen to the music 

and dance, something different than talking about buses! 

He went on to add that even when there was music at the club: 

“You see, we can’t dance to that type of music. We’re not used 
to that type of music. And I suppose if most of us could dance 
the waltz that they do probably they (West Indians) would have 
join in more. But to sit all night and listen to ‘Knees Up Mother 

Brown’ and things like that, we’re not used to that music! .. . 

It’s a more lively atmosphere that we’re used to and that’s why 

we don’t go.’ 

Relations between Asians and white bus crews were, if anything, 
possibly more strained and problematic in the 1960s and 70s. 
Although Raghbir Singh did not find this to be the case, there seemed 
on the part of some crews resentment against those ‘Pakistanis’ who 
sat together and spoke in their own language in the bus canteen. One 
man related the following story with obvious delight: 

‘We had a canteen in Old Market (in Central Bristol) and... 

Jack Hodge came in there and there was four Pakistanis talking 

in their own language. He (Hodge) thumped the table and he 

says, ‘If our money is good enough for you to earn,’ he said, 

‘you'll talk our language while you’re here.’ 

‘Cause they, well, this was a thing that used to happen quite a 
bit with the Pakistanis, they’d sit at this table and they’re talking 
their lingo, and you don’t understand . . . I’m glad that Jack 
Hodge came in that day and as a representative of the men he hit 
the nail right on the heads. Oh he thumped the table and his 
language, it was vile! But we didn’t half enjoy (it)! (Laughs) You 
see, for all we know, they could’ve been saying — 

Second interviewee: (interrupting) — ‘. . . what they like 
about us!’ 

First interviewee: ‘What they’re saying may be quite innocent 
conversation, but we don’t know!’ 

Mrs. Grey agreed: 

*.. . what annoyed me was I didn’t know whether they were 
talking about me or not! They probably were!’ 

And Will James, a Jamaican, recalled telling his Asian workmates: 

*.. . when you are around a table, speak English. Because I 

don’t know if you’re planning to kill me or what!’ 

Feeling ran so high on this issue that, according to Mrs. Grey: 

‘it was brought up at union meeting that while they (the 

Pakistanis) were in the Company .. . and in the company of us 


53 


in the canteen, they should use the English language and nothing 

else.’ 

This seemingly trivial clash over language raises some interesting 
points. Were the Pakistanis being so very inconsiderate in speaking in 
what was after all their first language? 

Why was it assumed their conversation was maliciously directed 
against their English speaking co-workers? Did the legacy of British 
colonialism ensure that Asian languages were associated in the 
popular imagination with murderous treachery? Or was it sheer 
parochialism which prompted the union’s heavy handed response? 
One wonders how Britons emigrating to Hong Kong or the gulf states 
would have responded to a similar ban. 

Despite such conflicts, friendships between individuals of different 

racial backgrounds did exist on the buses. This is not to say that such 
friendships meant that people abandoned their racial prejudice. One 
could still have black friends and still resent ‘the blacks’. Nor did such 
friendships imply a more ‘pluralistic’ attitude on the part of white 
Bristolians. They could still adhere to a rigid insistence that when in 
Bristol, one had better do as the Bristolians do. 
Interracial friendships may come under increasing strain as jobs 
become scarcer and conditions tougher. Two of the black bus men 
with whom I spoke felt that the present recession will continue to 
affect the black workers most of all, that they will be the, ‘last hired 
and first fired,’ and that, more than twenty years after the boycott, 
Bristol is still a white man’s town. 


CONCLUSION 


Just how effective then had the campaign against the colour bar been? 
It seems to have left a rather acrimonious atmosphere between the 
leaders of Bristol Council, Wally Jenkins (Labour) and Gervaise 
Walker (Conservative) and certain sections of the black community. 
Perhaps, it could be argued, Stephenson had made things worse, not 
better by his confrontational style? Perhaps the more patient tactics, 
employed in Manchester against racial discrimination on the buses 
would have left a better legacy? 

This is doubtful. In Manchester, G.S.S. Sagar, a Sikh who waged a 
gentler fight for seven years on this issue had friends in the Council. 
Socialists and Liberals — including a number of Jewish Councillors 
sensitive to the matter of civil liberties — had facilitated Sagar’s 
struggle and advised him on tactics.185 But leaving aside the question 
of whether one should have to wait seven years for a favourable 
outcome, how many Bristol Councillors and Aldermen were willing to 


54 


take a stand against racial discrimination? The Conservatives certainly 
did not seem to be,!8 and the Labour Party was, with a few isolated 
exceptions,!87 conservative and parochial in its racial attitudes as its 
reluctance to take action about discrimination both before and after 
the bus dispute amply demonstrated. 

‘.. . SO determined is the city to feel that colour is no problem 

that when the New Bristol Group (a development of the 

seminars Anthony Wedgwood Benn held after his by-election 

Speeches) put forward a scheme for actively improving race 

relations, the City Council Labour Group threw it out, And this 

despite the ugly row over coloured bus crews which had made 
this stately and cultivated city notorious a few months earlier. 

The intolerable point about the New Bristol Group’s idea was 

that the proposed ‘Citizenship Council’ should be clearly and 

openly under the auspices of the City Council, established by the 

Lord Mayor, with a full-time liaison officer and the usual 

Corporation facilities, *88 

Of course, it could be argued that had the dispute not been so 
‘ugly’, the Council would afterwards have been more willing to put its 
resources where its lip service had for so long been. But it seems more 
likely that unchallenged, Bristol Council, would have continued in its 
‘stately and cultivated’ way to do nothing about racial discrimination. 
It has been said that Bristol was and is a particularly snobbish and 
racialist town, and that these characteristics stem in part from her 
history as a slave port. But what connection could there possibly be, 
one might ask, between the slave trade which ended in 1807 and the 
reception accorded to New Commonwealth immigrants in the 1950s 
and 1960s? 

I think that there are links, but they are not direct ones. The most 
obvious one is that the rural migrants who came to Bristol were 
themselves the descendents of the slaves whose sale had helped to 
make Bristol so prosperous a place. It is symbolic that some of the 
first West Indians came to Bristol as stowaways on banana boats to 
Avonmouth. The first bananas came to England via Bristol in 1904, 189 
and they are evidence of an underdeveloped West Indian economy 
geared to the convenience of England and the profit of the 
colonialists. 190 

But there is a more subtle link. The town that waxed rich on the 
colonial trade was primarily a commercial city.!9! And cities based on 
commerce and small scale industry are less likely to breed a militant 
and class conscious work force than those based on large scale 
industries like Manchester and Glasgow. Commercial cities, like 
Bristol or Liverpool, are, to paraphrase the words of another 
historian, ‘honeycombed’ by personal ties of patronage and 
deference, and given to be very status conscious. Even lower paid 


55 


"WUBd} JOYOLIO [BIOVI-]NUI sNqIUWO [OIsLIg ‘ualg.0 “MM pue (/uieydea) 
BUOIS °F '339AN97 “dq ‘[JEISEd “S ‘SIMA “Y ‘MO4 1U04} : ps0s2eD “qd pue ‘Yaqjes | ‘SGGID'f ‘Poomiiy ‘¢ 
MUaqiINg ‘Aed “qg ‘saYyoIeEYUL ‘dq ‘(AQsIdwiA) YYBiuy ‘yY ‘Mos YOeqG ‘wea, dng AIsny Ss,joIsi4g 


workers, especially, if they considered themselves to be ‘respectable’ 
rather than ‘rough’ would take care to distance themselves from lower 
status people of their own class.'%2 For like the poor white southerner 
in the American south of the 1950s, even the poorest Bristolian could 
feel he or she was at least ‘a cut above’ ‘the darkies’. 

Another question that remains to be addressed is whether or not the 
campaign against the colour bar influenced subsequent legislation. 
Paul Stephenson thinks it did. The 1965 Racial Discrimination Act 
was effected under Wilson’s regime. Tony Benn was in this 
government, and Tony Lester was being groomed for future office. 
Both were veterans of the Bristol campaign. 

But the link between the Race Relations Act and the Bristol bus 
boycott was probably less straightforward than Stephenson might 
contend. The 1965 Act banned discrimination in public places and 
accommodation but not in employment. The Act dealing with 
employment was passed in 1968. Also, Fenner Brockway, had been 
campaigning for a law against racial discrimination since 1954, long 
before the bus boycott. Still, it was Brockway who raised the question 
of discrimination on public transport in Parliament as a direct result 
of the Bristol colour bar and he certainly supported the boycott. We 
might conclude that the West Indian Development Council’s 
campaign was one of a number of factors which helped to raise the 
consciousness of Parliament about the need to take a stand against 
racial discrimination. But if we do, we should also keep in mind that 
the Race Relations Acts have been seen by some commentators as 
merely a sop to make immigration restrictions more palatable. 

Unfortunately, the Bristol bus dispute had a more directly decisive 
effect on the career of Learie Constantine who resigned early in 1964 
from his post of High Commissioner of Trinidad and Tobago. 

According to Sir Learie, his involvement in the dispute got him ‘into 
trouble’ with his own government: 

‘Suffice it to say that amongst other things my government felt I 
had exceeded my duties during the Bristol affair and should have 
recognised it as an internal matter for Management and Union 

and refused to intervene. 13 

It was a sad comment that the very person to act so constructively 
and forthrightly to secure the civil rights of black workers in Bristol, 
should be dealt with in this way. 

As far as the union was concerned, the bus boycott campaign raised 
both the consciousness and the defensiveness of the TGWU’s regional 
leadership. And although union representatives are now quick to 
repudiate the colour bar as a remnant of the bad old days before the 
National Bus Company, they are sti// resistant to the notion that racial 
discrimination is built into the structure of British society. Ron 
Nethercott: 


57 


‘TT didn’t know (of racial prejudice) until the bus strike came, I 
got to be honest. I never witnessed it from the bus strike and I’ve 
got to say I’ve never really witnessed it since! I’ve found very 
little prejudice expressed, certainly in my hearing, in my 
knowledge of the union since then. We have lots of coloured 
people in the union now.’ 

By explaining the colour bar simply in terms of economic factors 
and a ‘natural fear of the unknown;’ by minimising the existence and 
destructiveness of racism; and by ignoring the accommodations white 
trade unionists, as well as black and brown ones will need in the future 
to make, the regional trade union leadership has shown it has learned 
less than it could have done from the Bristol Bus Dispute of 1963. 


58 


(Bristol) Evening Post, 31 October 1961; J. Ragg, ‘West Indians 
in Bristol’, (n.d. but c. 1958) in Correspondence re the Welfare 
of Coloured People, Avon County Records Office, 3402c. Many 
of the articles from the Bristol local Press on the 1963 bus 
dispute are contained in a book of cuttings in Avon County 
Reference Library’s local collection entitled, The Coloured 
Population of Bristol, B28096. 

Mr. Owen Henry, interviewed 2 July 1985 and 9 July 1985. See 
F.F, Lee, ‘Racial Patterns in a British City: an Institutional 
Approach, Phylon, (Spring 1960), pp. 40—S0. 

Mr. Peter Carty, interviewed 11 December 1985. Ms. Joyce 
Anakie, a Jamaican born nurse working at Manor Park 
Hospital experienced similar problems. She met and married 
Mr. Paul Stephenson during the boycott campaign. 

The Department of the Bristol Medical Officer of Health, ‘The 
Size and Current Problems of the Immigrant Population in 
Bristol,’ a confidential paper (n.d. but c. 1962) in Literature on 
Immigration, A.C.R.O., 3525c.A. Richmond with M. Lyon, 
S.Hale, R. King, Migration and Race Relations in an English 
City, A Study in Bristol, (Oxford 1973), pp. 48—56, 115. 

The Rev. Andrew Hake, interviewed 9 December 1985. Rev 
Hake was an assistant to the Industrial adviser to the Bishop of 
Bristol unil 1957. See also the Report from the Department of 
Public health, ‘Maternal and Child Welfare Problems,’ (n.d. 
but c. 1962) in Literature on Immigration A.C.R.O., 3525c: 
“The majority of immigrant families live in one room in 
tenement houses let out to coloured families . . . The landlord is 
frequently a coloured man.’ See also the observation that 
‘Exploitation. by undesireable landlords is the real problem in 
fading housing areas, not immigration per se,’ in Department of 
Public Health, ‘‘Environmental Problems’’ (n.d. but c. 1964) in 
Correspondence, loc. cit., A.R.C.O., 3402c. See also (Bristol) 
Evening Post 6 Feb. 1962, on activity of slum lords. 

Owen Henry Interview. 

Ibid. 

Carty Interview. 

Ibid. 

Mr. Roy Hackett, Interviewed 19 November 1985. 

Mr. ‘John Garrett’ and Mr. ‘Tim Spring’ (not their real names), 
interviewed 20 June 1985. 

See Ken Pryce, Endless Pressure (London 1975), pp. 84; 
Interviews with Messrs. Owen Henry and ‘Will James’ (not his 
real name) interviewed 10 Feb. 1986, confirm this. 

Interviews with Messrs. ‘Garrett’ and ‘Spring’. This was not 
only a Bristolian attitude. See James Walvin, Passage to Britain 


59 


tS: 
16. 


Vis 


London 1984, p.99. Owen Henry Interview. 

‘Will James’ Interview. See also Answer of the Bristol 
Corporation Welfare Services to a question posed by the 
Association of Municipal Corporations, (n.d. but c. 1962) citing 
the very small minority of immigrants involved in prostitution, 
in Literature, loc. cit. A.C.R.O. 3525c? 

See footnote one. 

Jessie M. Hood, ‘Second Report of the Colonia! Liaison Officer 
to the Committee for the Welfare of Colonial Workers in 
Bristol’ for 1 April 1957 to 30 September 1958 in 
Correspondence A.C.R.O., 3402. M. Banton, ‘The Influence of 
Colonial Status upon Black-White Relations in England. 
1948—58,’ Sociology, vol 17 no.4, p.554. Thanks to M. Banton 
for this reference. 

P. Fryer, Staying Power, The History of Black People in 
Britain, (London 1984), pp. 376—8. 


Keesey’s Contemporary Archives, 4—11 October 1958, p. 16428. 
‘Many coloured immigrants had managed to save enough to buy small 
houses on mortgage, a fact which was resented by homeless whites, and 
in some cases had attempted to evict white tenants. Friendship 
between white girls and coloured men were also resented, especially by 
the younger white men; and a few coloured men in both London and 
Nottingham were known to be living on the immoral earnings of white 
girls. In Nottingham, a local recession had led to short-time working 
in certain industries and had aroused fears of coloured competition 
for jobs among unskilled workers, although in fact the proportion of 


coloured people among the unemployed . . . was extremely high.’ 

18. Owen Henry Interviews. 

19. Jessie Hood, op. cit. 

20. ‘Lecture for the Extra-Mural Dept.’ (of the University of 
Bristol), by the (unamed) Research Assistant of Dr. A.H. 
Richmond, probably Michael Lyon, 5 December 1966, in 
Literature, A.C.R.O., 3525c. The lecture cites the situation in 
St. Paul’s in 1961. 

21. M. Dresser, ‘Peoples’ Housing in Bristol 1880—1939’ in I. Bild, 
e. Bristol’s Other History, (Bristol 1983). 

22. Reply of the Bristol Corporation Welfare Services, op. cit.; A. 


Richmond, M. Lyon, et alia, Migration and Race Relations, op. 
cit. p. 95, which records a petition from residents from Martin 
St., Alfred St. Princes St. and Union Street, St. Paul’s 
‘protesting against disorderly conduct in several houses and 
calling for prostitution to be stopped.’ See also letter to the 
E.P., 9 May 1963: ‘. . . an argument often used by some people 
is that wherever West Indian people go we find ‘another City 
Road,’; also Letter from P. Brain E.P. 2 May 1963. As late as 


60 


23. 


24. 


29% 
26. 


Paks 
28. 
29: 


30. 


31. 
323 
33; 


1968, 61% of St. Pauls residents were white, E.J.B. Rose et alia, 
Colour and Citizenship (Oxford 1968), p.255. 

‘Environmental Problems,’ op. cit.; Jessie Hood, op. cit. Roy 
Hackett Interview. 

‘Letter to Town Clerk from H.C.W. Harris of the Housing 
Department.’, 8 Oct. 1962, in Correspondence, A.C.R.O., 
3402c; see also notes 24 and 27. 

E.P. 2 Nov. 1961. 

‘Notes of a Meeting Regarding the Community Development of 
West Indians in Bristol Held in the Town Clerk’s Office,’ 14 
May 1959 in Correspondence A.C.R.O., 3525c. ‘Mr. Muirhead 
(Community Relations Officer for the South of England) stated 
that in general West Indians complained that they had not been 
welcomed at Churches.’ Miss Jessie Hood notified the Bristol 
Council of Christian Churches of this state of affairs but the 
‘several offers of help which resulted’ came only ‘from all white 
parishes.’ 

Jessie Hood. op. cit. 

Owen Henry and Roy Hackett Interviews. 

Jessie Hood, op. cit. 1955 was the year the TUC passed a 
resolution against racial discrimination, R. Miles and A. 
Phizacklea, The TUC and Commonwealth Legislation, Social 
Science Research Council Working Paper on Ethnic Relations, 
1975. But in that same year the Transport and General Workers’ 
Union Biennial Delegate Conference reportedly called for 
stricter controls on foreign immigration, this call was repeated 
by the Conference in 1957 where a resolution for tighter controls 
on foreign labour ‘particularly West Indians’ was passed. I am 
indebted to Bill Murray for this reference. 

J. Hood, op. cit. This assertion is corroborated by Ald. H. 
Hennessey’s accusation in E.P. 2 May 1963 that the union 
colluded in a colour bar on the buses, and references to the 
ballot in The Daily Sketch 8 Masy 1963, p.6; John Morgan, 
‘Colour Bar, Bristol Fashion’, New Statesman, 10 May 1963, 
p.708. (Bristol) T. and G.W.U. in E.P. 2 May 1963 p.18. 
E.P, 2 May 1963. 

A Hake interview. 

Ibid. It is perhaps significant that at a conference on the 
‘Welfare of the Colonial Worker in Bristol’ held on 1 November 
1957, the chairman convening the conference, Rev. John Ragg 
of Bristol’s Committee for the Welfare of Colonial Workers, 
deplored on behalf of his committee ‘the poor response from 
employers’ representations and the complete lack of response 
from trade union representatives who were invited to attend the 
conference.’ 


61 


34. 
35: 


36. 
37. 
38. 
39! 
40. 


41. 
42. 


43. 


46. 


48. 


Interview with Mr. Don Bateman, 30 April 1985. 

E.P. 31 October 1961; 1 Nob. 1961. The first of these articles 
was by George Gardiner, reportedly the same man was later the 
Tory M.P. and Monday Club member. 

E.P. 2 Nov. 1961. 

E.P. 1 Nov. 1961. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

Roy Hackett interview. See also Bristol Consumer, a short lived 
magazine of the Bristol Consumer Group, 1962, Avon County 
Reference Library, B24005: in a ‘Report of an Investigation of 
Complaints about the city services of the Bristol Omnibus 
Company,’ it was stated ‘Many complaints could be put down to 
shortage of crews . . . It is also true that other areas have the 
same trouble . . . London and Nottinghm etc. have met it by 
employing coloured crews. (It is noteworthy that no writers 
objected to coloured crews and several praised them.’ 

Ibid. O. Henry Interview. 

Biographical details gleaned from interviews with Mr. Paul 
Stephenson 20 January 1985, 9 June 1985 and The Guardian 27 
Feb. 1964. I am indebted to Mr. Stephenson for the loan of his 
collection of newspaper cuttings of the boycott and related 
matters and for letting me view his tape of a 1983 HTV 
programme commenorating the twentieth anniversary of the 
Bristol bus dispute. Miss Judith Tang, a Sixth Former at 
Hanham High School, Bristol in 1986 also interviewed Mr. 
Stephenson and I have also used her tape of the interview which 
she kindly lent me. Paul Stephenson was financed by a Rowntree 
Grant, Miss Hood by a Dulverton Grant. One wonders whether 
either would have been hired had the Council had had to finance 
the posts itself. 

O. Henry Interview. 

E.P. 1 May 1963. 

Paul Stephenson, interview. Stephenson is, of course, correct. 
The first Act making racial segregation in public places or 
accommodation unlawful was passed in 1965; the first Act 
making racial discrimination in employment was passed in 1968. 
E.P. I May 1963, p.1. 

R. Hackett, Interview. 

(Bristol Corporation) Council Minutes, 13 Feb. 1962, p.227. See 
also letter alluding to the bar by R. Dent in E.P. date?? 1962, 
p.16. Minutes of the Joint Transport Committee (Bristol 


62 


49. 
50. 


mile 
a2 
33: 
34. 
55. 
56. 


Si. 


58. 


59: 


Corporation), 15 March 1962, para. 1371. 

Ibid. 

Ibid.; The Council members of the joint Transport Committee 
included Ald. Stevenson (no relation). Ald. Hennessey 

Ald. Cann; Mr. Abrams, Mr. Walker, Mr. Jones, Reserve — 
Ald. Ford. 

E.P. 30 April 1963. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

E.P, 1 May 1963. See The Times, 3 May 1963, p.11. 

Interview with Mr. Jack Hodge, 6 May 1985. Mr. Hodge was, at 
the time of the interview, Regional Trade Group Secretary for 
the whole of the Passenger Section of the T and GWU Western 
and South Wales Region. he has recently retired. 

Interview with Mr. Ron Nethercott, South Western Regional 
Secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union, 12 
September 1985. 

‘From time to time the company’s ruling has been challenged 
and it is generally well known but the arrival of Mr. Stephenson 
with strong feelings and organizing abilities has led to more heat 
than is usual in Bristol controversies.’ from The Times 3 May 
1963, p.1. See Nethercott’s statement in £.P. 1 November 1961. 
R. Nethercott, Interview. Later in the Interview Mr. Nethercott 
denied he had stated Mr. Coxwell said his members did not want 
to work with ‘coloured’ people. But the tape of the interview 
confirms that he did originally say this. 

Both Owen Henry and Paul Stephenson attest to this. For more 
information on the singular career of this Afro-American 
activist deported to Britain during the McCarthy era, see A. 
Davis, Women, Race and Class, (London 1982), pp. 164—71; B. 
Bryan, S. Dadzie and S. Scafe, The Heart.of the Race, Black 
Women’s Lives in Britain, (London 1985) pp. 135—9; B. 
Johnson, ‘J think of my mother’ Notes on The Life and Times 
of Claudia Jones, Karia Press, London 1984. 

Western Daily Press, 2 May 1963; The Times 3 May 1963, p.4 
The Gleaner (Kingston, Jamaica), 3 May 1963, p. 1. 

WDP, 2 May 1963. 

E.P., 2 May 1963; WDP, 2 May 1963. 

Nethercott said of the protest: ‘ ‘‘It is like having your hands tied 
behind your back and then being punched in the face, I just don’t 
like it’? in E.P. 2 May 1963; WDP, 2 May 1961. 

E.P., 2 May 1963. 

E.P. 2 May 1963; 1 May 1963; WDP 2 May 1963. 

WDP 3 May 1963; E.P. 2 May 1963. the representatives of the 


63 


o2. 


93. 


Jamaican High Commissioner were Mr. Hosford Scott and Mr. 
H. St. Clair MacKenzie. they also met with Ian Patey, and with 
Leslie of the Bristol Labour Party, along with ‘several 
University lecturers.’ 

E.P. 2 May 1963. 

WDP 2 May 1963. 

Ibid. 

The Gleaner, 3 May 1963. 

E.P, 2 May 1963. 

WDP 3 Mary 1963; Stan Awberry (Labour M.P. for 
Bristol Central) first attempted to table a motion on the dispute. 
Awberry was a member and former organizer of the Transport 
and General Workers Union. See also E.P. 2 May 1963; The 
Times 3 May 1963, p. 11. 

E.P. 2 May 1963; WDP 3 May 1963. 

WDP 3 May 1963. 

E.P. 1 May 1963, 2 May 1963. 

E:P, 2 May 1963. 

E.P. 3 May 1963, p. 1. 

WDP, | May 1963, p.6. 

E.P. 1 May 1963 p. 18, see P. Stephenson’s comparison of 
Bristol with Little Rock in WDP 3 May 1963. 

Both the BBC and the HTV covered the story. 

Nethercott interview. 

Stephenson and Hackett interviews. 

E.P. 4 May 1963; see also Stephenson collection for photograph 
of Gaskin and Stephenson. 

E.P. 4 May 1963. 

E.P,. 3 May 1963; WDP 4 May 1963. 


Nethercott Interview. 

WDP 4 May 1963, p. 1. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

Dr. Tomkin’s pronouncements are in E.P. 6 May 1963. 
Interestingly, both Nethercott and Stephenson saw the Bishop as 
their personal friend, but neither were particularly pleased about 
the public support he gave them during this dispute. 
Nethercott Interview; undated cutting from the Daily Herald but 
probably 4 May 1963. In Stephenson collection; Stephenson 
interview; E.P. 12 June 1963. 

‘Report from the High Court of Justice; Queen’s Bench Division 
— Stephenson v. Odhams Press and Another in The Times (n.d. 
but 1965); plus local Press cuttings on case, undated in 
Stephenson collection; Interviews with Nethercott and 
Stephenson. 


64 


94. 
95. 
96. 


97. 
98. 
99: 


100. 
101. 


102. 
103. 
104. 


105. 
106. 


107. 
108. 
109. 


110. 


111. 
112: 
113. 
114. 


BIS: 
116. 
1B IT 


118. 
19: 
120. 
121. 
122. 


123. 


Don Bateman Interview. 

The Gleaner, 6 May 1963, p.1. 

P. Carty Interview; See also the Daily Telegraph, 6 May 1963, 
p.19; The Times, 6 May 1963, p.8.; E.P. 6 May 1963. 
Stephenson and Hackett Interviews. 

‘W. James’ Interviews. 

John Morgan, ‘Colour Bar Bristol Fashion,’ op. cit.; Hackett, 
Henry, Stephenson, Nethercott interviews. 

The Times, 6 May 1963, p.8. 

The Times, 7 May 1963, p. 5. The critic was Mr. Robert 
Davidson an advisor on immigrants to the Jamaican High 
Commissioner. 

E.P. 6 May 1963; The Times 7 May 1963. 

WDP 6 May 1963, p.7. 

E.P. 6 May 1963, p. 1.; The Times 7 May 1963, p.5.; E.P. 7 May 
1963; The Gleaner, 7 May 1963, p.2. 

WDP, 7 May 1963. 

John Morgan, ‘Colour Bar, Bristol Fashion’, op. cit. 


See G. Howat, Learie Constantine, (London 1975) p. 187. 

The Gleaner, 8 May 1963, p. 2. 

The Gleaner, 11 May 1963, p. 1; 12 May 1963; 13 May 1963; 14 
May 1963. 

WDP 8 May 1963. p. 1; E.P. 8 May 1963; The Times 8 May 
1963, p. 12. 

E.P. 8 May 1963. 

The Daily Sketch, 8 May 1963, p. 6. 

John Morgan, ‘Colour Bar, Bristol Fashion,’ op. cit. 

WDP 1 May 1963; E.P. 1 Nov. 1961, 30 April 1963; Hodge 
interview, Patey interviewed in HTV tape, 1983 Joc. cit. 

The Times 7 May 1963, p. 12. 

The Times, 8 May 1963, p.12. 

E.P.,8 May 1963; See Hansard (Commons Proceedings), 
1962—3. vol. 670, pp. 97—100; 15 May 1963, vol. 677, written 
answers, pp. 149—50. 

WDP 7 May 1963. 

Cited in The Gleaner, 8 May 1963, p. 2. 

The Times, 7 May 1963, p. 13. 

Ibid. 

The Times, Letter from Lord Walston, 9 May 1963, p. 13. See 
also Hansard, 15 May 1963 vol. 677, written answers pp. 
149—5S0, op. cit., where the Tory Minister of Transport, Ernest 
Marples was able to deny the need for legislation against racial 
discrimination by citing the way in which the Transport Holding 
Company had dealt with its Bristol subsidiary! 

WDP, 14 May 1963. 


65 


124. 
125, 
126. 
127; 


128. 
129° 
130. 


131. 


132. 
133. 
134. 


135. 
136. 
137: 
138. 
139: 
140. 


141. 


142. 
143. 


Ibid. 

Ibid. 

E.P. 14 May 1963. 

The ‘Russian waiters’ remark was made by a labour activist 
whose name will not be cited for obvious reasons. The 
Communist organizer cited was Mr. Joe Berry, WDP, 11 May 
1963. 

Garrett Interview. 

Ibid. 

Ibid., See also Anon. The History of the Bristol Omnibus Co. 
Ltd. Avon County Reference Library, B267704; WDP 3 May 
1963. The WDP report maintains that the above mentioned 
option came up in 1935. Nationalisation in 1949 gave the British 
Transport Commission a controlling interest in Bristol Omnibus 
Company. In January 1963, the Commission was dissolved and 
‘control passed to the Transport Holding Company.’ 

Group interview with retired drivers and conductors of the 
Bristol Omnibus Company, 11 June 1985. 


J. Hodge interview. 

Ibid. 

R. Nethercott, Interview; For Jack Jones’s view, see Workers 
Against Racism, The Roots of Racism (London, 1985), p.63. 
E.P. 30 April 1963, p. 1; ‘Garrett’ interview. 

J. Hodge interview. 

Jim Cheek, interviewed along with Jack Hodge, 7 May 1985. 
E.P., 16 May 1963. 

R. Nethercott Interview. 

Hansard (Commons Proceedings), 1961—2, vol. 648, pp. 
982—8. For an interesting assessment of the reluctance of many 
English people to face up to the existence of racism, see M. and 
A. Dummeett, ‘The role of Government in Britain’s Racial 
Crisis,’ in C. Husband, ed. Race in Britain, (London 1982), p. 
101. See M. Barker. The New Racism (London 1983) for a wider 
definition of racism. 

‘Mr. and Mrs. Grey’ (not their real names) interviewed 1 
November 1985. The survey conducted by A. Richmond et alia 
supports my contention that in Bristol racism as well as 
economic worries, local pride and an intolerance of cultural 
diversity was behind white Bristolian’s disklike of immigrants, 
see Richmond et alia, op. cit., chapter 10. 

‘W. James’ interview. 

Linda Ind, ‘Nationalism and Education in Bristol, 1880—1914’, 
unpublished special study for the B.A. (Hons) in Humanities, 
Bristol Polytechnic, 1985. See also ‘Just Plain Commonsense: 
the roots of racism’ by E. Lawrence in the Centre for 


66 


147. 


148. 


149. 
15¢. 
151. 
152. 
153. 
154. 
155. 


156. 
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 
161. 
162. 


163. 
164. 


Contemporary Cultural Studies, The Empire Strikes Back, 
(London 1982); J. Mackenzie, Propaganda and Empire 
(Manchester 1984). 


. N Pronay, ‘British Newsreel in the 1930’s, (part two) their 


Policies and Impact, History (1972) vol. 57, p. 66. 


. R. Nethercott interview. See Hilda Jennings, Societies in the 


Making (Bristol 1954). 


. Bristol Broadsides, Barton Hill Remembers (Bristol 1983); 


Leonard Veer, Bedminster Between the Wars, (Bristol 1985); 
Cecil Pope, A Family in St. Paul’s 1920—1940, (Bristol 1985); 
Pope remembers that there was no ‘colour problem’ perhaps 
because there was only one black family, the St. Clair family 
(the wife appears to have been English, the husband West 
Indian). 

E.J.B. Rose et alia, Colour and Citizenship, (Oxford), p. 

429, for the Victorian values reportedly predominating in the 
first generation West Indian community in Bristol. For 
Caribbean underdevelopment, see note 213. 


E.P.4 May 1963. See E.P. 1 May 1963, 3 May 1963, 7 May 1963, 
8 May 1963, 9 May 1963, 14 May 1963; 30 August 1963. See also 
WDP | May 1963, 8 May 1963, 9 May 1963 and 16 May 1963. 
EP. 4 May 1963. 

E.P. 9 May 1963. 

E.P. 9 May 1963. 

E.P. 8 May 1963. 

E.P. 4 May 1963. 

E.P. 9 May 1963. 

E.P. 9 May 1963, see other letters one commuting theme the 
same issue; see also WDP 3 May 1963, 4 May 1963, 6 May 1963, 
14 May 1963 and WDP 16 May 1963 for letters on similar theme. 
E.P. 7 May 1963; see also E.P. 9 May 1963. 

E.P. ? May 1963. 

E.P. 8 May 1963, 4 May 1963. 

E.P. 4 May 1963, 8 May 1963, 9 May 1963. 

E.P. 9 May 1963. 

E.P. 11 May 1963; WDP 11 May 1963. 

See the letter signed by Hennessy, St. John Read, Fenner 
Brockway, Philip Whiting, J. Malos, S. D. M. McConville, H. 
D. Dickinson and Paul Stephenson in E.P. 1 May 1963; Letters 
from Flowers and Cllr. Boss also in same issue; WDP 11 May 
1963. 

See E.P. 2 May 1963; WDP 11 May 1963. 

E.P. 2 May 1963. It is not known how many people eventually 
signed the petition but the bus crews who used the Hartcliffe 
Community Canteen were among the first 200 to sign. 


67 


165. 


166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 


170. 
LA: 
qez: 


173: 
174. 
175. 


176. 
Ts 


178. 


179: 
180. 
181. 


182. 


183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 


187. 


Joan Smith, ‘Labour Tradition in Glasgow and Liverpool’, 
‘History Workshop’, (Spring 1984), issue 17, pp. 32 ff. 

E.P. 1 May 1963, see letter from Knowle, Bristol signed ‘Bias.’ 
E.P. 4 May 1963. 

E.P. 28 August 1963. 

Tbid.; WDP29 August 1963. See also Guardian cutting 27 

August 1963 in Stephenson collection. 

E.P., 28 August 1963. 

Ibid. 

The Guardian, 29 August 1963; Daily Express 29 August 1963; 
Daily Telegraph, 29 August 1963, all cuttings from Stephenson 
collection. 

E.P. 28 August 1963. 

WDP 29 August 1963; £.P. 30 August 1963. 

E.P. 28 August 1963. Yet The Guardian 29 August 1963 said 
neither Patey or Coxwell were ‘very explicit’ about the busmen’s 
reaction: ‘Mr. Patey would make no comment. He did point out 
that ‘there are certain people who have very strong views on this 
question.’ Yet The Guardian too observed the proposal to end 
the bar was received with ‘little dissension,’ by the 500 emplyees 
voting. 

E.P. 28 August 1963. 

I have not named the two very reliable sources who gave me this 
information for obvious reasons. It is worth pointing out that 
racial quota had been negotiated by Tand GWU officials in 
Manchester as early as 1948. 

‘The Size and Current Problem of the Immigrant Population in 
Bristol,’ op. cit., ACRO 3525c. 

E.P. 28 August 1963. 

Ibid.; Daily Telegraph 29 August 1963. 

Mr. Raghbir Singh Interviewed 13 May 1985; WDP 17 
September 1963, E.P. 17 September 1963. 


D. Beetham, Transport and Turbans: A Comprehensive Study 
in Local Politics,(Oxford 1970), pp. 23 ff. 

WDP, 17 September 1963. 

WDP, 18 September 1963. 

D. Beetham, op. cit.,, pp. 23-36 and 90-98. 

For the most part, The Conservatives kept. their heads down 
during the dispute, but see the letter from the convenor of the 
Bristol Bow Group in E.P. 4 May 1963 and the remarks of the 
‘Citizen’ Councillor in WDP 11 May 1963. 

I have made this statement on the basis of my study of Bristol’s 
Council Minutes for the period, 1958—63. Only twice was 
reference made to racial discrimination—these being in 
questions raised by Councillors Bill Graves and Mr. Langham. 


68 


188. 


189. 
190. 


191. 
192. 


193. 


The question raised by Cllr. Graves was about links with South 
Africa, BCM 1958-59, p. 263. 

J. Stewart, ‘‘Local Colour,’’ New Statesman, 8 May 1964. See 
Output a short-lived journal produced by the New Bristol 
Group, whose members included Tony Benn, Avon Reference 
Library, B 24873. 

Arrowsmith’s Dictionary of Bristol, (Bristol 1906), p. 232. 
Arrowsmith’s Dictionary, p. 232; P. M. Sherlock, West Indian 
Nations, a New History, (Jamaica 1973), pp. 173 -—184—5. 
See J. Waller, Democracy and Sectarianism, (Oxford 1984). 

‘* ‘Tt will be demonstrated again and again (that) white native 
workers (on London buses) were very much concerned with 
considerations of status in their relationship with coloured 
immigrants and that some accorded the coloured immigrant 
fewer rights because of his colour.’ Quoted from D. Brooks, 
Race and Labour in London Transport (Oxford 1975), p. 5 See 
also R. Miles and A. Phizacklea, eds., Racism and Political 
Action (London 1985), pp. 96—7. 

Howat, op. cit., p. 189. 


69 


Black and White On The Buses 


While the civil rights marches and bus boycotts took place in the 
Southern States of the USA here in Bristol in 1963 black workers had to 
fight their own campaign for equal rights to employment on the city’s 
buses. Madge Dresser’s dramatic narrative tells the story of a small 
group of black workers whose fight for their rights, in the face of the 
outright opposition, disinterest and misunderstanding of the bus 
company, the union, the churches and the city council, was to make 
national headlines. 


ISBN 0 906944 30 9 


Price £1.95 


